Title: 2026.acl-long.1709.pdf

URL Source: https://aclanthology.org/2026.acl-long.1709.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 11 Jun 2026 01:28:59 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
> Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 36848–36865 July 2-7, 2026 ©2026 Association for Computational Linguistics

# MAGMA: A Multi-Graph based Agentic Memory Architecture for AI Agents 

Dongming Jiang α, Yi Li α, Guanpeng Li β , Bingzhe Li α*

> α

Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Dallas  

> β

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Florida 

{dongming.jiang, yi.li3, bingzhe.li}@utdallas.edu liguanpeng@ufl.edu 

Abstract 

Memory-Augmented Generation (MAG) ex-tends Large Language Models with external memory to support long-context reasoning, but existing approaches largely rely on semantic similarity over monolithic memory stores, en-tangling temporal, causal, and entity infor-mation. This design limits interpretability and alignment between query intent and re-trieved evidence, leading to suboptimal rea-soning accuracy. In this paper, we propose MAGMA, a multi-graph agentic memory ar-chitecture that represents each memory item across orthogonal semantic, temporal, causal, and entity graphs. MAGMA formulates re-trieval as policy-guided traversal over these relational views, enabling query-adaptive selec-tion and structured context construction. By de-coupling memory representation from retrieval logic, MAGMA provides transparent reasoning paths and fine-grained control over retrieval. Experiments on LoCoMo and LongMemEval demonstrate that MAGMA consistently outper-forms state-of-the-art agentic memory systems in long-horizon reasoning tasks. The open-source code is available at: https://github. com/FredJiang0324/MAGMA .

1 Introduction 

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demon-strated remarkable capabilities across a wide range of tasks (Brown et al., 2020; Achiam et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2022), yet they remain limited in their ability to maintain and reason over long-term con-text. These models process information within a finite attention window, and their internal represen-tations do not persist across interactions, causing earlier details to be forgotten once they fall out-side the active context (Brown et al., 2020; Belt-agy et al., 2020a). Even within a single long se-quence, attention effectiveness degrades with dis-tance due to attention dilution , positional encoding 

> *Corresponding author

limitations, and token interference, leading to the well-known “lost-in-the-middle” and context-decay phenomena (Liu et al., 2024; Press et al., 2021a). Moreover, LLMs lack native mechanisms for stable and structured memory, resulting in inconsistent re-call, degraded long-horizon reasoning, and limited support for tasks requiring persistent and organized memory (Khandelwal et al., 2018; Maharana et al., 2024). To address these inherent limitations, Memory-Augmented Generation (MAG) systems have emerged as a promising direction for enabling LLMs to operate beyond the boundaries of their fixed context windows. MAG equips an agent with an external memory continuously recording inter-action histories and allowing the agents to retrieve and reintegrate past experiences when generating new responses. By offloading long-term context to an explicit memory module, MAG systems provide a means for agents to accumulate knowledge over time, support multi-session coherence, and adapt to evolving conversational or task contexts. In this paradigm, memory is no longer implicit in inter-nal activations but becomes a persistent, queryable resource that substantially enhances long-horizon reasoning, personalized behavior, and stable agent identity. Despite their promise, current MAG systems exhibit structural and operational limitations that constrain their effectiveness in long-term reason-ing (Li et al., 2025; Chhikara et al., 2025; Xu et al., 2025; Packer et al., 2023; Rasmussen et al., 2025; Wang and Chen, 2025; Kang et al., 2025a). Most existing approaches store past interactions in mono-lithic repositories or minimally structured memory buffers, relying primarily on semantic similarity, re-cency, or heuristic scoring to retrieve relevant con-tent. For example, A-Mem (Xu et al., 2025) orga-nizes past interactions into Zettelkasten-like mem-ory units that are incrementally linked and refined, yet their retrieval pipelines rely primarily on se-

36848 mantic embedding similarity, missing the relations such as temporal or causal relationships. Cognitive-inspired frameworks like Nemori (Nan et al., 2025) introduce principled episodic segmentation and rep-resentation alignment, enabling agents to detect event boundaries and construct higher-level seman-tic summaries. However, their memory structures are still narrative and undifferentiated, with no ex-plicit modeling of distinct relational dimensions. To address the structural limitations of exist-ing MAG systems, we propose MAGMA, a multi-graph agentic memory architecture that explic-itly models heterogeneous relational structure in an agent’s experience. MAGMA represents each memory item across four orthogonal relational graphs (i.e., semantic, temporal, causal, and en-tity), yielding a disentangled representation of how events, concepts, and participants are related. Built on this unified multi-graph substrate, MAGMA introduces a hierarchical, intent-aware query mechanism that selects relevant relational views, traverses them independently, and fuses the resulting subgraphs into a compact, type-aligned context for generation. By decoupling memory rep-resentation from retrieval logic, MAGMA enables transparent reasoning paths, fine-grained control over memory selection, and improved alignment between query intent and retrieved evidence. This relational formulation provides a principled and ex-tensible foundation for agentic memory, improving both long-term coherence and interpretability. Our contributions are summarized as follows: 1. We propose MAGMA , a multi-graph agentic memory architecture that explicitly models se-mantic, temporal, causal, and entity relations essential for long-horizon reasoning. 2. We introduce an Adaptive Traversal Policy that routes retrieval based on query intent, enabling efficient pruning of irrelevant graph regions and achieving lower latency and reduced token us-age. 3. We design a dual-stream memory evolution mechanism that decouples latency-sensitive event ingestion from asynchronous structural consolidation, preserving responsiveness while refining relational structure. 4. We demonstrate that MAGMA consistently out-performs state-of-the-art agentic memory sys-tems on long-context benchmarks including Lo-CoMo and LongMemEval, while reducing re-trieval latency and token consumption relative User/Environment      

> Memory (Dynamic, Evolving)
> Retrieval &
> New prompt
> Output
> Answer Update
> Agentic Memory
> Query
> Agent (LLM)
> Figure 1: High-Level Architecture of Memory-Augmented Generation (MAG).

to prior systems. The code is open-sourced 1.

2 Background 

Existing Large Language Models (LLMs) face fun-damental challenges in handling long-term agentic interactions. These challenges stem from the in-herent limitations of fixed-length contexts, which result in fragmented memory and an inability to maintain narrative coherence over time. The evo-lution of long-term consistency in LLMs is shifted from Context-Window Extension (Beltagy et al., 2020a; Press et al., 2021a; Kang et al., 2025c; Qian et al., 2025), Retrieval-Augmented Genera-tion (RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2024; Gutiérrez et al., 2025; Lin et al., 2025) to Memory-Augmented Gen-eration (MAG) .Retrieval-oriented approaches enrich the model with an external, dynamic memory library, giving rise to the paradigm of Memory-Augmented Gener-ation (MAG) (Zhong et al., 2024; Park et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2024). Formally, unlike static RAG, MAG maintains a time-variant memory Mt that evolves via a feedback loop: 

ot = LLM (qt, Retrieve (qt, Mt)) (1) 

Mt+1 = Update (Mt, q t, o t) (2) As shown in Figure 1, this feedback loop enables the memory module to evolve over time: the user query is combined with retrieved information to form an augmented prompt, and the model’s output is subsequently written back to refine Mt.Some prior schemes focused on structuring the intermediate states or relationships of memory to enable better reasoning. Think-in-Memory (TiM) (Liu et al., 2023) stores evolving chains-of-thought 

> 1https://github.com/FredJiang0324/MAGMA

36849 User New      

> Message
> Vector Database
> Entity Temporal Semantic Causal
> Data Structure Layer
> Relation graphs
> Synaptic Ingestion
> Sematic Linking
> Temporal Linking
> Entity Linking
> Dense/Sparse
> Embedding
> Event
> Segmentation
> Asynchronous Consolidation
> Async Queue
> (Buffer / IDs)
> Neighbor
> Retrieval
> User
> Query
> Intent -Aware Router Adaptive Topological Retrieval Context Synthesizer
> Linearized
> Context p rompt
> Final
> Response
> Anchor
> Identification RRF Fusion Adaptive
> Traversal Policy
> LLM Causal
> Inference
> Query process
> Write/update process

Figure 2: Architectural Overview of MAGMA. The system is composed of three layers: (1) A Query Process that routes and synthesizes context; (2) A Data Structure Layer organizing memory into Relation Graphs and a Vector Database; and (3) A Write/Update Process utilizing a dual-stream mechanism for fast ingestion and asynchronous consolidation. 

to maintain consistency. A-MEM (Xu et al., 2025) draws inspiration from the Zettelkasten method, organizing knowledge into an interconnected note network. More recently, graph-based approaches like GraphRAG (Edge et al., 2024a) and Zep (Ras-mussen et al., 2025) structure memory into knowl-edge graphs to capture cross-document dependen-cies. We provide a detailed discussion of related work in Appendix A. However, prior work typically organizes memory around associative proximity (e.g., semantic sim-ilarity) rather than mechanistic dependency (Kici-man et al., 2023). As a result, such methods can retrieve what occurred but struggle to reason about 

why , since they lack explicit representations of causal structure, leading to reduced accuracy in complex reasoning tasks (Jin et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2025). 

3 MAGMA Design 

In this section, we introduce the proposed Multi-Graph based Agentic Memory (MAGMA) design and its components in detail. 

3.1 Architectural Overview 

MAGMA architecture is organized into the fol-lowing three logical layers, orchestrating the in-teraction between control logic and the memory substrate as illustrated in Figure 2. 

Query Process: The inference engine responsi-ble for retrieving and synthesizing information. It comprises the Intent-Aware Router for dispatching tasks, the Adaptive Topological Retrieval module for executing graph traversals, and the Context Syn-thesizer for generating the final narrative response. 

Data Structure ( G): The unified storage substrate that fuses disparate modalities. As shown in the center of Figure 2, it maintains a Vector Database 

for semantic search alongside four distinct Rela-tion Graphs (i.e., Semantic, Temporal, Causal and Entity). This layer provides the topological foun-dation for cross-view reasoning. 

Write/Update Process: A dual-stream pipeline manages memory evolution. It decouples latency-sensitive operations via Synaptic Ingestion (Fast Path) from compute-intensive reasoning via Asyn-chronous Consolidation (Slow Path), ensuring the system remains responsive while continuously deepening its memory structure. Functionally, the Query Layer interacts with the Data Structure Layer to execute the syn-chronous Query Process (Section 3.3), while the Write/Update Layer manages the continuous Mem-ory Evolution (Section 3.4). 

3.2 Data Structure Layer 

As the core component of Memory-Augmented Generation (MAG), the data structure layer is re-sponsible for storing, organizing, and evolving past information to support future retrieval and updates. In MAGMA, we formalize this layer as a time-variant directed multigraph Gt = ( Nt, Et), where nodes represent events and edges encode heteroge-neous relational structures. This unified manifold 36850 enables structured reasoning across multiple logi-cal dimensions(i.e., semantic, temporal, causal, and entity) while preserving their orthogonality. 

Unified node representation: The node set N is hierarchically organized to represent experience at multiple granularities, ranging from fine-grained atomic events to higher-level episodic groupings. Each Event-Node ni ∈ N event is defined as: 

ni = ⟨ci, τ i, vi, Ai⟩ (3) where ci denotes the event content (e.g., obser-vations, actions, or state changes), τi is a dis-crete timestamp anchoring the event in time, and 

vi ∈ Rd is a dense representation indexed in the vector database (Johnson et al., 2019). The at-tribute set Ai captures structured metadata such as entity references, temporal cues, or contextual descriptors, enabling hybrid retrieval that integrates semantic similarity with symbolic and structural constraints. 

Relation graphs (edge space): The edge set E

is partitioned into four semantic subspaces, corre-sponding to the relation graphs: • Temporal Graph ( Etemp ): Defined as strictly ordered pairs (ni, n j ) where τi < τj . This immutable chain provides the ground truth for chronological reasoning. • Causal Graph ( Ecausal ): Directed edges repre-senting logical entailment. An edge eij ∈ E causal 

exists if S(nj |ni, q ) > δ, explicitly inferred by the consolidation module to support "Why" queries. • Semantic Graph ( Esem ): Undirected edges con-necting conceptually similar events, formally de-fined by cos( vi, vj ) > θ sim .• Entity Graph ( Eent ): Edges connecting events to abstract entity nodes, solving the object perma-nence problem across disjoint timeline segments. 

3.3 Query Process: Adaptive Hierarchical Retrieval 

As illustrated in Figure 3, retrieval in MAGMA is formulated as a policy-guided graph traversal rather than a static lookup operation. The query process is orchestrated by a Router R, which decomposes the user query into structured control signals and exe-cutes a multi-stage retrieval pipeline (Algorithm 1) that dynamically selects, traverses, and fuses rele-vant relational views. Four main stages in the query process is introduced below: 

Stage 1 - Query Analysis & Decomposition: The process begins by decomposing the raw user query 

q into structured control signals, including seman-tic, lexical, and temporal cues. MAGMA then ex-tracts three complementary representations to guide the retrieval process: • Intent Classification ( Tq): A lightweight clas-sifier maps q to a specific intent type Tq ∈{WHY , WHEN , ENTITY }. This acts as the "steer-ing wheel," determining which graph edges will later be prioritized (e.g., "Why" queries trigger a bias for Causal edges). • Temporal Parsing ( [τs, τ e]): A temporal tagger resolves relative expressions (e.g., "last Friday") into absolute timestamps, defining a hard time window for filtering. • Representation Extraction: The system simul-taneously generates a dense embedding ⃗q for se-mantic search and extracts sparse keywords qkey 

for exact lexical matching. 

Stage 2 - Multi-Signal Anchor Identification: 

Before initiating graph traversal, the system first identifies a set of anchor nodes that serve as entry points into the memory graph. To ensure robustness across query modalities, we fuse signals from dense semantic retrieval, lexical keyword matching, and temporal filtering using Reciprocal Rank Fusion (RRF) (Cormack et al., 2009): 

Sanchor = Top K

 ∑

> m∈{ vec,key,time }

1

k + rm(n)



(4) This ensures robust starting points regardless of query modality. 

Stage 3 - Adaptive Traversal Policy: Starting from the anchor set Sanchor , the system expands the context using a Heuristic Beam Search. Unlike rigid rule-based traversals, MAGMA calculates a dynamic transition score S(nj |ni, q ) for moving from node ni to neighbor nj via edge eij . This score fuses structural alignment with semantic rele-vance: 

S(nj |ni, q ) = exp 

(

λ1 · ϕ(type (eij ), T q)

︸ ︷︷ ︸

> Structural Alignment

+ λ2 · sim (⃗n j ,⃗ q)

︸ ︷︷ ︸

> Semantic Affinity

) (5) 36851 Intent -Aware Router 

> Query Intent Analysis
> Assign
> Weights
> Causal
> Query
> Expansion
> Time
> window
> /filter
> Logic
> Check

User Query 

> Semantic Signal
> Vector Search
> Lexical Signal
> Keyword Search
> Temporal Signal
> Time Window/Filter
> RRF Fusion
> &
> Anchor
> Identification
> Context Synthesizer
> Linearized Context
> Cprompt
> Anchor
> Nodes
> Entity
> Relationship
> Check
> Semantic
> Temporal
> Entity
> Retrieved nodes
> Query Analyzer
> Policy
> Guided
> Semantic
> Temporal
> Entity
> Causal

Final Response Figure 3: Query process with adaptive hybrid retrieval pipeline. (1) Query Analysis detects intent and fuses signals to find Anchors. (2) Adaptive Traversal navigates specific graph views (Causal, Temporal) based on the policy weights. 

Here, sim (·) denotes the cosine similarity be-tween the neighbor’s embedding and the query em-bedding. The structural alignment function ϕ dy-namically rewards edge types based on the detected query intent Tq:

ϕ(r, T q) = w⊤

Tq · 1r (6) where wTq is an adaptive weight vector specific to intent Tq (e.g., assigning high weights to CAUSAL 

edges for "Why" queries), and 1r is the one-hot encoding of the edge relation. At each step, the algorithm retains the top-k

nodes with the highest cumulative scores. This ensures the traversal is guided by a dual signal: strictly following the logical structure (via ϕ) while maintaining contextual focus (via sim). 

Stage 4: Narrative Synthesis via Graph Lin-earization: The final phase transforms the re-trieved subgraph Gsub into a coherent narrative con-text. MAGMA employs a structure-aware lineariza-tion protocol that preserves the relational depen-dencies encoded in the graph with the following three phases. 

1. Topological Ordering: Raw nodes are reor-ganized to reflect the logic of the query. For tem-poral queries ( Tq = WHEN ), nodes are sorted by timestamp τi. For causal queries ( Tq = WHY ), we apply a topological sort on the causal edges Ecausal 

to ensure causes precede effects in the prompt con-text. 

2. Context Scaffolding with Provenance: To mitigate hallucination, each node is serialized into a structured block containing its timestamp, content, and explicit reference ID. We define the linearized 

Algorithm 1 Adaptive Hybrid Retrieval (Heuristic Beam Search) 

Input: Query q, Graph G, VectorDB V , Intent Tq

Output: Narrative Context Cout 

1: // Phase 1: Initialization 

2: Sanchor ← RRF (V. SEARCH (⃗q), K. SEARCH (q key )) // Hybrid Retrieval 

3: CurrentF rontier, V isited ← Sanchor 

4: wTq ← GET ATTENTION WEIGHTS (Tq )

5: for d ← 1 to M axDepth do 

6: Candidates ← PRIORITY QUEUE () 

7: for u ∈ CurrentF rontier do 

8: for v ∈ G. NEIGHBORS (u) do 

9: if v / ∈ V isited then 

10: // Calculate transition score via Eq. 5 

11: suv ← exp( λ1(w⊤ 

> Tq

· 1euv ) +

λ2sim (⃗v,⃗ q)) 

12: score v ← score u · γ + suv // Apply Decay γ

13: Candidates. PUSH (v, score v )

14: end if 

15: end for 

16: end for 

17: CurrentF rontier ←

Candidates. TOP K(BeamW idth )

18: V isited. ADD ALL (CurrentF rontier )

19: if V isited. SIZE () ≥ Budget then break 

20: end if 

21: end for 

22: Csorted ← TOPOLOGICAL SORT (V isited, T q )

23: return SERIALIZE (Csorted )

context Cprompt as: 

Cprompt = ⊕ 

> ni∈Sort (Gsub )

[<t: τi> ni.content <ref: ni.id >]

(7) where ⊕ denotes string concatenation. 

3. Salience-Based Token Budgeting: Given a fixed LLM context window, we cannot include all retrieved nodes. We utilize the relevance scores 

S(nj |ni, q ) computed in Eq. (5) to enforce a dy-namic budget. Low-probability nodes are summa-rized into brevity codes (e.g., "...3 intermediate 36852 Algorithm 2 Fast Path: Synaptic Ingestion                           

> Input: User Interaction I, Current Graph Gt
> Output: Updated Graph Gt+1
> 1: nt←SEGMENT EVENT (I)
> 2: nprev ←GET LAST NODE (Gt)
> 3: // Update Temporal Backbone
> 4: G.ADD EDGE (nprev , n t,type =TEMP )
> 5: // Indexing
> 6: vt←ENCODER (nt.c )
> 7: V DB. ADD (vt, n t.id )
> 8: Queue. ENQUEUE (nt.id )// Trigger Slow Path
> 9: return nt

events..."), while high-salience nodes retain full semantic detail. This structured scaffold forces the LLM to act as an interpreter of evidence rather than a creative writer, significantly reducing grounding errors. 

3.4 Memory Evolution (Write and Update) 

Long-term reasoning requires not only effective retrieval, but also a memory substrate that can adapt and reorganize as experience accumulates. MAGMA addresses this requirement through a structured memory evolution scheme that incre-mentally refines its multi-relational graph over time. Specifically, the transition from Gt to Gt+1 is governed by a dual-stream process that decouples latency-sensitive ingestion from compute-intensive consolidation (Kumaran et al., 2016), balancing short-term responsiveness with long-term reason-ing fidelity. 

Fast path ( synaptic ingestion): The Fast Path operates on the critical path of interaction, con-strained by strict latency requirements. It performs non-blocking operations: event segmentation, vec-tor indexing, and updating the immutable temporal backbone ( nt−1 → nt). As detailed in Algorithm 2, no blocking LLM reasoning occurs here, ensuring the agent remains responsive regardless of memory size. 

Slow path (structural consolidation): Asyn-chronously, the slow path performs Memory Con-solidation (Algorithm 3). It functions as a back-ground worker that dequeues events and densifies the graph structure. By analyzing the local neigh-borhood N (nt) of recent events, the system em-ploys an LLM Φ to infer latent connections: 

Enew = Φ reason (N (nt), Hhistory ) (8) This process constructs high-value Ecausal and Eent 

links, effectively trading off compute time for rela-tional depth. 

Algorithm 3 Slow Path: Structural Consolidation                            

> 1: Worker Process:
> 2: loop
> 3: id ←Queue. DEQUEUE ()
> 4: if id is null then continue
> 5: end if
> 6: nt← G .GET NODE (id )
> 7: Nlocal ← G .GET NEIGHBORHOOD (nt,hops = 2)
> 8: // Infer latent Causal and Entity structures
> 9: P rompt ←FORMAT (Nlocal )
> 10: Enew ←ΦLLM (P rompt )
> 11: G.ADD EDGES (Enew )
> 12: end loop

3.5 Implementation 

We implement MAGMA as a modular three-layer architecture designed for extensibility, scalability, and deployment flexibility. The storage layer ab-stracts over heterogeneous physical backends, pro-viding unified interfaces for managing the typed memory graph, dense vector indices, and sparse keyword indices. This abstraction cleanly separates the logical memory model from its physical real-ization, enabling seamless substitution of storage backends (e.g., in-memory data structures versus production-grade graph or vector databases) with minimal engineering effort. The retrieval layer coordinates the core algo-rithmic components, including memory construc-tion, multi-stage ranking, and policy-guided graph traversal. It is supported by specialized utility modules for episodic segmentation and temporal normalization, which provide structured signals to downstream retrieval and traversal policies. The ap-plication layer manages the interaction loop, evalu-ation harnesses, and prompt construction, serving as the interface between the agent and the underly-ing memory system. 

4 Experiments 

We conduct comprehensive experiments to evalu-ate both the reasoning effectiveness and systems properties of the proposed MAGMA architecture over state-of-the-art baselines. 

4.1 Experimental Setup Datasets. We evaluate long-term conversational capability using two widely adopted benchmarks: 

(1) LoCoMo (Maharana et al., 2024): which con-tains ultra-long conversations (average length of 9K tokens) designed to assess long-range temporal and causal retrieval. (2) LongMemEval (Wu et al., 2024): a large-scale stress-test benchmark with 36853 Table 1: Performance on the LoCoMo benchmark evaluated using the LLM-as-a-Judge metric. Higher scores indicate better performance. LLM model is based on gpt-4o-mini.                                     

> Method Multi-Hop Temporal Open-Domain Single-Hop Adversarial Overall Full Context 0.468 0.562 0.486 0.630 0.205 0.481 A-MEM 0.495 0.474 0.385 0.653 0.616 0.580 MemoryOS 0.552 0.422 0.504 0.674 0.428 0.553 Nemori 0.569 0.649 0.485 0.764 0.325 0.590
> MAGMA (ours) 0.528 0.650 0.517 0.776 0.742 0.700

an average context length exceeding 100K tokens, used to evaluate scalability and memory retention stability over extended interaction horizons.. 

Baselines. We compare MAGMA against four state-of-the-art memory architectures. For fair com-parison, all methods employ the same backbone LLMs. • Full Context : Feeds the entire conversation his-tory into the LLM. • A-MEM (Xu et al., 2025): A biological-inspired, self-evolving memory system that dynamically organizes agent experiences. • Nemori (Nan et al., 2025): A graph-based mem-ory utilizing a "predict-calibrate" mechanism for episodic segmentation. • MemoryOS (Kang et al., 2025a) : A semantic-focused memory operating system employing a hierarchical storage strategy. 

Metrics. Following standard evaluation protocols, we primarily use the LLM-as-a-Judge score (Zheng et al., 2023) to assess the accuracy of different methods. The detailed evaluation prompt used for the judge model is provided in the appendix. For completeness, we also report token-level F1 and BLEU-1 (Papineni et al., 2002). 

4.2 Overall Comparison 

This section introduces the accuracy performance comparison between all methods on the LoCoMo benchmark based on LLM-as-a-judge. As shown in Table 1, MAGMA achieves the highest over-all judge score of 0.7, substantially outperforming the other baselines: Full Context (0.481), A-MEM (0.58), MemoryOS (0.553) and Nemori (0.59) by relative margins of 18.6% to 45.5%. This re-sult demonstrates that explicitly modeling multi-relational structure enables more accurate long-horizon reasoning than flat or purely semantic mem-ory architectures. A closer analysis reveals that MAGMA’s ad-vantage is particularly pronounced in reasoning-intensive settings. In the Temporal category, MAGMA slightly but consistently outperforms oth-ers (Judge: 0.650 for MAGMA vs. 0.422 - 0.649 for others), validating the effectiveness of our Tempo-ral Inference Engine in resolving relative temporal expressions into grounded chronological represen-tations. The performance gap further widens under adversarial conditions, where MAGMA attains a judge score of 0.742. This robustness stems from the Adaptive Traversal Policy, which prioritizes causal and entity-consistent paths and avoids se-mantically similar yet structurally irrelevant dis-tractors that often mislead vector-based retrieval systems. Additional results and analyzes, includ-ing case studies and evaluations under alternative metrics, are provided in the appendix. 

4.3 Generalization Study 

To evaluate generalization under extreme context lengths, we compare MAGMA against prior meth-ods on the LongMemEval benchmark. Long-MemEval poses a substantial scalability challenge, with an average context length exceeding 100k to-kens, and therefore serves as a rigorous stress test for long-term memory retention and retrieval under strict computational constraints. As summarized in Table 2, MAGMA achieves the highest average accuracy (61.2%), outperform-ing both the Full-context baseline (55.0%) and the Nemori system (56.2%). These results indicate that MAGMA generalizes effectively to ultra-long inter-action histories while maintaining strong retrieval precision. At the same time, the results highlight a favor-able efficiency–granularity trade-off. Although the Full-context baseline performs strongly on single-session-assistant tasks (89.3%), this performance comes at a prohibitive computational cost, requir-ing over 100k tokens per query. MAGMA achieves competitive accuracy (83.9%) while using only 0.7k–4.2k tokens per query, representing a reduc-tion of more than 95%. This demonstrates that 36854 Table 2: Performance comparison on LongMemEval dataset across different question types. We compare our MAGMA method against the Full-context baseline and the Nemori system.                           

> Question Type Full-context Nemori MAGMA
> (101K tokens) (3.7–4.8K tokens) (0.7–4.2K tokens)
> gpt-4o-mini  single-session-preference 6.7% 62.7% 73.3%
> single-session-assistant 89.3% 73.2% 83.9% temporal-reasoning 42.1% 43.0% 45.1%
> multi-session 38.3% 51.4% 50.4% knowledge-update 78.2% 52.6% 66.7%
> single-session-user 78.6% 77.7% 72.9%
> Average 55.0% 56.2% 61.2%

Table 3: System efficiency comparison with total mem-ory build time (in hours), average token consumption per query (in k tokens), and average query latency (in seconds).                   

> Method Build Time (h) Tokens/Query (k) Latency (s) Full Context N/A 8.53 1.74 A-MEM 1.01 2.62 2.26 MemoryOS 0.91 4.76 32.68 Nemori 0.29 3.46 2.59
> MAGMA 0.39 3.37 1.47

MAGMA effectively compresses long interaction histories into compact, reasoning-dense subgraphs, preserving essential information while substantially reducing inference-time overhead. 

4.4 System Efficiency Analysis 

To evaluate the system efficiency of MAGMA, two metrics are focused: (1) memory build time (the time required to construct the memory graph) and (2) token cost (the average tokens processed per query). Table 3 reports the comparative results. While A-MEM achieves the lowest token consumption (2.62k) due to its aggressive summarization, it sac-rifices reasoning depth (see Table 1). In contrast, MAGMA achieves the lowest query latency (1.47s) about 40% faster than the next best retrieval base-line (A-MEM) while maintaining a competitive token cost (3.37k). This efficiency stems from our Adaptive Traversal Policy, which prunes irrelevant subgraphs early, and the dual-stream architecture that offloads complex indexing to the background. 

4.5 Ablation Study 

In this subsection, we conduct a systematic abla-tion study to assess the contribution of individual components in MAGMA. By selectively disabling edge types and traversal mechanisms, we isolate the sources of its reasoning capability. The results 

Table 4: Breakdown analysis on the performance impact of different schemes in MAGMA.                   

> MAGMA schemes Judge F1 BLEU-1 w/o Adaptive Policy 0.637 0.413 0.357 w/o Causal Links 0.644 0.439 0.354 w/o Temporal Backbone 0.647 0.438 0.349 w/o Entity Links 0.666 0.451 0.363
> MAGMA (Full) 0.700 0.467 0.378

in Table 4 reveal three main findings. First, removing the Adaptive Policy results in the largest performance drop, with the Judge score decreasing from 0.700 to 0.637. This confirms that intent-aware routing is critical: without it, retrieval degenerates into a static graph walk that introduces structurally irrelevant information and degrades rea-soning quality. Second, removing either Causal Links or the Temporal Backbone leads to compara-ble and substantial performance losses (0.644 and 0.647, respectively), indicating that causal struc-ture and temporal ordering provide complemen-tary, non-substitutable axes of reasoning. Finally, removing Entity Links causes a smaller but con-sistent decline (0.700 to 0.666), highlighting their role in maintaining entity permanence and reducing hallucinations in entity-centric queries. To further isolate the contribution of each re-lation type, we additionally conducted a single-graph-only ablation on LoCoMo, shown in Table 5. The results are consistent with the leave-one-out findings in Table 4. Among single-graph variants, 

Causal Only achieves the highest overall score (0.590), suggesting that causal relations provide strong logical filtering and robustness against dis-tractor noise. Temporal Only performs best on tem-poral questions (0.620), confirming that explicit temporal structure is particularly important for se-quential reasoning. In contrast, Entity Only obtains the lowest overall score (0.531): while it remains 36855 Table 5: Single-graph ablation study on LoCoMo.                               

> Graph Configuration Multi-Hop Temporal Open-Domain Single-Hop Adversarial Overall Causal Only 0.470 0.460 0.430 0.650 0.680 0.590 Temporal Only 0.440 0.620 0.450 0.650 0.520 0.577 Entity Only 0.485 0.420 0.460 0.640 0.450 0.531
> Full MAGMA 0.528 0.650 0.517 0.776 0.742 0.700

helpful for concept bridging in multi-hop reason-ing, it lacks both timeline awareness and logical filtering, which explains why removing entity links causes the smallest drop in the full-system ablation. Overall, these results show that no single rela-tion type is sufficient to recover MAGMA’s full reasoning capability, as all single-graph variants remain below 0.60 overall. By explicitly decou-pling causal, temporal, and entity relations and combining them with adaptive traversal, MAGMA leverages their complementary strengths to achieve the best overall performance. 

5 Conclusion 

We introduced MAGMA, a multi-graph agentic memory architecture that models semantic, tem-poral, causal, and entity relations within a uni-fied yet disentangled memory substrate. By for-mulating retrieval as a policy-guided graph traver-sal and decoupling memory ingestion from asyn-chronous structural consolidation, MAGMA en-ables effective long-horizon reasoning while main-taining low inference-time latency. Empirical re-sults on LoCoMo and LongMemEval demonstrate that MAGMA consistently outperforms state-of-the-art memory systems while achieving substan-tial efficiency gains under ultra-long contexts. 

6 Limitations 

While MAGMA demonstrates strong empirical per-formance, it has several limitations. First, the qual-ity of the constructed memory graph depends on the reasoning fidelity of the underlying Large Lan-guage Models used during asynchronous consoli-dation. This dependency is a shared limitation of agentic memory systems that rely on LLM-based structural inference, as they are susceptible to ex-traction errors and hallucinations (Pan et al., 2024; Xi et al., 2025; Wadhwa et al., 2023). Although MAGMA employs structured prompts and conser-vative inference thresholds to reduce spurious links, erroneous or missing relations may still arise and propagate to downstream retrieval. Nevertheless, our experimental results indicate that, even under these constraints, agentic memory systems such as MAGMA substantially outperform traditional base-lines, including full-context approaches, in long-horizon reasoning tasks. Second, multi-graph substrate may introduce ad-ditional storage and engineering complexity com-pared to flat, vector-only memory systems. Main-taining multiple relational views and dual-stream processing incurs a little higher implementation and memory overhead, which may limit applicabil-ity in highly resource-constrained environments. Finally, most existing agentic memory systems, including MAGMA, are primarily evaluated on long-context conversational and agentic bench-marks such as LoCoMo and LongMemEval. While these benchmarks effectively stress temporal and causal reasoning, they do not cover the full range of settings in which agentic memory may be re-quired(Hu et al., 2025; Jiang et al., 2026). Extend-ing MAGMA to other scenarios, such as multi-modal agents or environments with heterogeneous observation streams, may require additional adap-tation and calibration. Addressing these broader evaluation settings remains an important research direction for future work. 

7 Acknowledgment 

This work was partially supported by NSF 2343863, 2413520, 2417747 and 2440611. Any opinions, conclusions, or recommendations ex-pressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the NSF. 

References     

> Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, and 1 others. 2023. Gpt-4 techni-cal report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 .Iz Beltagy, Matthew E Peters, and Arman Cohan. 2020a. Longformer: The long-document transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05150 .

36856 Iz Beltagy, Matthew E Peters, and Arman Cohan. 2020b. Longformer: The long-document transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05150 .Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, and 1 others. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:1877–1901. Prateek Chhikara, Dev Khant, Saket Aryan, Taranjeet Singh, and Deshraj Yadav. 2025. Mem0: Building production-ready ai agents with scalable long-term memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.19413 .Gordon V. Cormack, Charles L A Clarke, and Stefan Buettcher. 2009. Reciprocal rank fusion outperforms condorcet and individual rank learning methods. In 

Proceedings of the 32nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Infor-mation Retrieval , SIGIR ’09, page 758–759, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machin-ery. Darren Edge, Ha Trinh, Newman Cheng, Joshua Bradley, Alex Chao, Apurva Mody, Steven Truitt, Dasha Metropolitansky, Robert Osazuwa Ness, and Jonathan Larson. 2024a. From local to global: A graph rag approach to query-focused summarization. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16130 .Darren Edge, Ha Trinh, Newman Cheng, Joshua Bradley, Alex Chao, Apurva Mody, Steven Truitt, Dasha Metropolitansky, Robert Osazuwa Ness, and Jonathan Larson. 2024b. From local to global: A graph rag approach to query-focused summarization. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16130 .Bernal Jiménez Gutiérrez, Yiheng Shu, Weijian Qi, Sizhe Zhou, and Yu Su. 2025. From rag to memory: Non-parametric continual learning for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14802 .Yuyang Hu, Shichun Liu, Yanwei Yue, Guibin Zhang, Boyang Liu, Fangyi Zhu, Jiahang Lin, Honglin Guo, Shihan Dou, Zhiheng Xi, and 1 others. 2025. Memory in the age of ai agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.13564 .Le Huang, Hengzhi Lan, Zijun Sun, Chuan Shi, and Ting Bai. 2024. Emotional rag: Enhancing role-playing agents through emotional retrieval. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Knowledge Graph (ICKG) , pages 120–127. IEEE. Dongming Jiang, Yi Li, Songtao Wei, Jinxin Yang, Ayushi Kishore, Alysa Zhao, Dingyi Kang, Xu Hu, Feng Chen, Qiannan Li, and 1 others. 2026. Anatomy of agentic memory: Taxonomy and empirical anal-ysis of evaluation and system limitations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.19320 .Wenqi Jiang, Suvinay Subramanian, Cat Graves, Gus-tavo Alonso, Amir Yazdanbakhsh, and Vidushi Dadu. 2025. Rago: Systematic performance optimization for retrieval-augmented generation serving. In Pro-ceedings of the 52nd Annual International Sympo-sium on Computer Architecture , pages 974–989. Ziyan Jiang, Xueguang Ma, and Wenhu Chen. 2024. Longrag: Enhancing retrieval-augmented gener-ation with long-context llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.15319 .Zhijing Jin, Yuen Chen, Felix Leeb, Luigi Gresele, Ojasv Kamal, Zhiheng Lyu, Kevin Blin, Fernando Gonzalez Adauto, Max Kleiman-Weiner, Mrinmaya Sachan, and 1 others. 2023. Cladder: Assessing causal reasoning in language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:31038– 31065. Jeff Johnson, Matthijs Douze, and Hervé Jégou. 2019. Billion-scale similarity search with gpus. IEEE Transactions on Big Data , 7(3):535–547. Jiazheng Kang, Mingming Ji, Zhe Zhao, and Ting Bai. 2025a. Memory os of ai agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.06326 .Jiazheng Kang, Mingming Ji, Zhe Zhao, and Ting Bai. 2025b. Memory os of ai agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.06326 .Jikun Kang, Wenqi Wu, Filippos Christianos, Alex J Chan, Fraser Greenlee, George Thomas, Marvin Pur-torab, and Andy Toulis. 2025c. Lm2: Large memory models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.06049 .Urvashi Khandelwal, He He, Peng Qi, and Dan Ju-rafsky. 2018. Sharp nearby, fuzzy far away: How neural language models use context. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.04623 .Emre Kiciman, Robert Ness, Amit Sharma, and Chen-hao Tan. 2023. Causal reasoning and large language models: Opening a new frontier for causality. Trans-actions on Machine Learning Research .Dharshan Kumaran, Demis Hassabis, and James L Mc-Clelland. 2016. What learning systems do intelligent agents need? complementary learning systems the-ory updated. Trends in cognitive sciences , 20(7):512– 534. Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Hein-rich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-täschel, and 1 others. 2020. Retrieval-augmented gen-eration for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:9459– 9474. Yi Li, Lianjie Cao, Faraz Ahmed, Puneet Sharma, and Bingzhe Li. 2026. Hippocampus: An efficient and scalable memory module for agentic ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.13594 .Zhiyu Li, Shichao Song, Chenyang Xi, Hanyu Wang, Chen Tang, and 1 others. 2025. Memos: A memory os for ai system. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.03724 .36857 Shuhang Lin, Zhencan Peng, Lingyao Li, Xiao Lin, Xi Zhu, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2025. Cache mech-anism for agent rag systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.02919 .Lei Liu, Xiaoyan Yang, Yue Shen, Binbin Hu, Zhiqiang Zhang, Jinjie Gu, and Guannan Zhang. 2023. Think-in-memory: Recalling and post-thinking enable llms with long-term memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.08719 .Nelson F Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paran-jape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy Liang. 2024. Lost in the middle: How language mod-els use long contexts. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 12:157–173. Adyasha Maharana, Dong-Ho Lee, Sergey Tulyakov, Mohit Bansal, Francesco Barbieri, and Yuwei Fang. 2024. Evaluating very long-term conver-sational memory of llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17753 .Jiayan Nan, Wenquan Ma, Wenlong Wu, and Yize Chen. 2025. Nemori: Self-organizing agent mem-ory inspired by cognitive science. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.03341 .Charles Packer, Vivian Fang, Shishir_G Patil, Kevin Lin, Sarah Wooders, and Joseph_E Gonzalez. 2023. Memgpt: Towards llms as operating systems. Shirui Pan, Linhao Luo, Yufei Wang, Chen Chen, Ji-apu Wang, and Xindong Wu. 2024. Unifying large language models and knowledge graphs: A roadmap. 

IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engi-neering , 36(7):3580–3599. Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic evalu-ation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics , pages 311–318, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Mered-ith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S Bern-stein. 2023. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th an-nual acm symposium on user interface software and technology , pages 1–22. Ofir Press, Noah A Smith, and Mike Lewis. 2021a. Train short, test long: Attention with linear biases enables input length extrapolation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.12409 .Ofir Press, Noah A Smith, and Mike Lewis. 2021b. Train short, test long: Attention with linear biases enables input length extrapolation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.12409 .Hongjin Qian, Zheng Liu, Peitian Zhang, Kelong Mao, Defu Lian, Zhicheng Dou, and Tiejun Huang. 2025. Memorag: Boosting long context processing with global memory-enhanced retrieval augmentation. In 

Proceedings of the ACM on Web Conference 2025 ,pages 2366–2377. Preston Rasmussen, Pavlo Paliychuk, Travis Beauvais, Jack Ryan, and Daniel Chalef. 2025. Zep: a tempo-ral knowledge graph architecture for agent memory. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.13956 .Somin Wadhwa, Silvio Amir, and Byron C Wallace. 2023. Revisiting relation extraction in the era of large language models. In Proceedings of the conference. association for computational linguistics. meeting ,volume 2023, page 15566. Yu Wang and Xi Chen. 2025. Mirix: Multi-agent mem-ory system for llm-based agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.07957 .Zheng Wang, Shu Teo, Jieer Ouyang, Yongjun Xu, and Wei Shi. 2024. M-rag: Reinforcing large language model performance through retrieval-augmented gen-eration with multiple partitions. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 1966–1978. Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, and 1 others. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting elic-its reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:24824– 24837. Di Wu, Hongwei Wang, Wenhao Yu, Yuwei Zhang, Kai-Wei Chang, and Dong Yu. 2024. Longmemeval: Benchmarking chat assistants on long-term interac-tive memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.10813 .Zhiheng Xi, Wenxiang Chen, Xin Guo, Wei He, Yi-wen Ding, Boyang Hong, Ming Zhang, Junzhe Wang, Senjie Jin, Enyu Zhou, and 1 others. 2025. The rise and potential of large language model based agents: A survey. Science China Information Sci-ences , 68(2):121101. Shijia Xu, Zhou Wu, Xiaolong Jia, Yu Wang, Kai Liu, and April Xiaowen Dong. 2026. Self-correcting rag: Enhancing faithfulness via mmkp context selection and nli-guided mcts. Preprint , arXiv:2604.10734. Wujiang Xu, Zujie Liang, Kai Mei, Hang Gao, Jun-tao Tan, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2025. A-mem: Agentic memory for llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.12110 .Yiming Zeng, Wanhao Yu, Zexin Li, Tao Ren, Yu Ma, Jinghan Cao, Xiyan Chen, and Tingting Yu. 2025. Bridging the editing gap in llms: Fineedit for pre-cise and targeted text modifications. Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 2193–2206. Zhuosheng Zhang, Yao Yao, Aston Zhang, Xiangru Tang, Xinbei Ma, Zhiwei He, Yiming Wang, Mark Gerstein, Rui Wang, Gongshen Liu, and 1 others. 36858 2025. Igniting language intelligence: The hitch-hiker’s guide from chain-of-thought reasoning to lan-guage agents. ACM Computing Surveys , 57(8):1–39. Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, and 1 others. 2023. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. Advances in neural information pro-cessing systems , 36:46595–46623. Wanjun Zhong, Lianghong Guo, Qiqi Gao, He Ye, and Yanlin Wang. 2024. Memorybank: Enhancing large language models with long-term memory. In Pro-ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-gence , volume 38, pages 19724–19731. 

A Related Work 

Following the framing in main text, we organize related work along the same progression: from context window extension to retrieval augmented generation (RAG) and finally to memory aug-mented generation (MAG), and then discuss struc-tured/graph memories and causal reasoning, which are central to long-horizon agentic interactions. 

Context-window Extension. A direct line of work extends the effective context length of Transform-ers by modifying attention or positional extrap-olation. Longformer (Beltagy et al., 2020b) in-troduces sparse attention patterns to scale to long documents, reducing quadratic cost while retain-ing locality and selected global connectivity. AL-iBi (Press et al., 2021b) (Attention with Linear Biases) enables length extrapolation by injecting distance-aware linear biases into attention scores, improving robustness when testing on longer se-quences than those seen in training. Recent efforts also add explicit memory modules or hybrid mech-anisms to push beyond pure attention-window scal-ing. For example, LM2 (Kang et al., 2025c) pro-poses a decoder-only architecture augmented with an auxiliary memory to mitigate long-context lim-itations. MemoRAG (Qian et al., 2025) similarly emphasizes global-memory-enhanced retrieval to boost long-context processing when raw context is insufficient or inefficient. While these approaches improve long-range coverage, they do not, by them-selves, address the continual, evolving, and write-back nature of agent memory required for multi-session interactions. 

Retrieval Augmented Generation. RAG (Lewis et al., 2020) augments an LLM with external re-trieval over a fixed corpus, classically retrieving supporting passages and conditioning generation on them. Subsequent work explores better integra-tion with long-context models and more scalable retrieval pipelines. LongRAG (Jiang et al., 2024) studies how to exploit long-context LLMs together with retrieval, improving the ability to incorporate larger retrieved evidence sets. Other systems focus on structuring the retrieved memory space or op-timizing the RAG serving stack: M-RAG (Wang et al., 2024) uses multiple partitions to encourage fine-grained retrieval focus, while RAGO (Jiang et al., 2025) provides a systematic framework for performance optimization in RAG serving. Further-more, to improve the reliability of retrieved context, approaches like Self-Correcting RAG (Xu et al., 2026) enhance generation faithfulness via selec-tive context filtering and inference-guided search. However, standard RAG typically assumes a static knowledge base. In contrast, agentic settings re-quire memory that is continuously updated (the feedback loop described in the main text). This mo-tivates the shift to MAG systems, where memory is dynamic and evolves with interaction histories. 

Memory Augmented Generation and Agent Memory Systems. MAG systems maintain and update an external memory over time, enabling agents to accumulate knowledge, preserve iden-tity, and remain coherent across sessions. Early and representative directions include memory con-struction and write-back strategies for long-term agent behavior, such as MemoryBank (Zhong et al., 2024) and generative agents style architectures that emphasize persistent profiles and evolving state grounded in past interactions (Nan et al., 2025; Maharana et al., 2024; Zeng et al., 2025). A grow-ing body of work adopts systems metaphors and designs: MemGPT (Packer et al., 2023) frames LLM agents with an operating-system-like mem-ory hierarchy, emphasizing paging and controlled context management. More recent memory OS systems propose explicit storage hierarchies, effi-cient memory modules, and controllers (e.g., Mem-oryOS (Kang et al., 2025b), MemOS (Li et al., 2025), and Hippocampus (Li et al., 2026)) to man-age persistence, scalability, and retrieval policies at scale. In addition, practical agent-memory stacks (e.g., Zep (Rasmussen et al., 2025)) offer temporal knowledge-graph-based memory services aimed at real-world deployment constraints. 

Structured memory: chains-of-thought and graph-based representations. Beyond flat text buffers or vector stores, several methods explicitly structure memory to support reasoning. Think-in-36859 Memory (TiM) stores evolving chains-of-thought to improve consistency across long-horizon reason-ing, while A-MEM (Xu et al., 2025) is inspired by Zettelkasten-style linking of notes/experiences. These methods highlight the value of represent-ing intermediate reasoning traces or explicit links, but many retrieval pipelines still predominantly rely on semantic similarity as the primary access mechanism. Graph-based approaches have recently gained traction as a way to capture cross-document and cross-episode dependencies. GraphRAG (Edge et al., 2024b) builds entity-centric graphs and com-munity summaries to answer more global questions over large corpora. Zep proposes a temporally-aware knowledge-graph engine (Graphiti) that syn-thesizes conversational and structured business data while preserving historical relations. The main text notes these graph-based lines explicitly and mo-tivates a key gap: many systems organize mem-ory around associative proximity (semantic related-ness) rather than mechanistic dependency. 

Causal reasoning and long-horizon evaluation. 

Causal reasoning has been highlighted as both im-portant and challenging for LLMs. The work (Kici-man et al., 2023) study LLMs’ ability to generate causal arguments across multiple causal tasks and emphasize robustness/failure modes, reinforcing that what happened retrieval is not sufficient for why reasoning in many settings. Benchmarking efforts such as LoCoMo (Maharana et al., 2024) stress long-range temporal and causal dynamics in multi-session conversations and provide evaluation tasks that expose long-horizon memory deficits. The paper’s experimental setup also uses Long-MemEval (Wu et al., 2024) as an ultra-long context stress test, and evaluates via LLM-as-a-Judge proto-cols standard in modern instruction-following eval-uation. Overall, prior work demonstrates steady progress in (i) scaling context length, (ii) improv-ing retrieval pipelines, and (iii) building struc-tured, evolving memories for agents. The main text positions MAGMA within this trajectory by explicitly targeting multi-relational structure (se-mantic/temporal/causal/entity) and intent-aware re-trieval control. 

B System Implementation Details 

B.1 Hyperparameter Configuration 

Table 6 presents the comprehensive configuration used in our experiments. These parameters were empirically optimized on the LoCoMo benchmark. Notably, MAGMA employs an Adaptive Scoring 

mechanism where weights ( λ) shift dynamically based on the detected query intent. 

Table 6: Hyperparameter settings for MAGMA. "Traver-sal Weights" correspond to the intent-specific vector 

wTq , while λ1 and λ2 control the global balance be-tween structural alignment and semantic affinity (Eq. 5).                                     

> Module Parameter Value/Range
> Embedding Model (Default) all-MiniLM-L6-v2
> Model (Optional) text-embedding-3-small
> Dimension 384 / 1536 Inference LLM Backbone gpt-4o-mini
> Temperature 0.0 Retrieval (Phase 1) RRF Constant ( k)60 Vector Top-K 20
> wkeyword (Fusion) 2.0 – 5.0 Sim. Threshold 0.10–0.30 Traversal (Phase 2) Max Depth 5 hops Max Nodes 200 Drop Threshold 0.15 Adaptive Weights
> λ1(Structure Coef.) 1.0 (Base)
> λ2(Semantic Coef.) 0.3 – 0.7
> wentity (in wTq)2.5 – 6.0
> wtemporal (in wTq)0.5 – 4.0
> wcausal (in wTq)3.0 – 5.0
> wphrase (in wTq)2.5 – 5.0

C Prompt Library 

MAGMA employs a sophisticated prompt strategy with three distinct types, each optimized for spe-cific cognitive tasks within the memory pipeline. 

C.1 Event Extraction Prompt (JSON-Structured) 

To ensure robustness against hallucination and pars-ing errors, this module employs a strict JSON schema enforcement strategy. The prompt explic-itly defines the extraction targets to ensure down-stream graph integrity, capturing not just entities but also semantic relationships and temporal mark-ers. 

System Prompt: Event Extractor 

System Role: You are an automated Graph Memory Parser. Your task is to extract structured metadata from raw conversational logs to build a knowledge graph. 

Input Data: 

• Speaker: {speaker} • Text: {text} • Context: {prev_summary} 

Instructions: Analyze the input and return ONLY avalid JSON object matching the specific schema below. Do not include markdown formatting. 

Target Schema: 

• "entities" : List of proper nouns (People, Locations, Organizations). • "topic" : String (1–3 words representing the main theme). 36860 • "relationships" : List of strings describing interactions (e.g., "X researches Y"). • "semantic_facts" : List of atomic facts preserving key information. • "dates_mentioned" : List of temporal strings (e.g., "next Friday", "2024-01-01"). • "summary" : One-sentence summary preserving speaker attribution. 

C.2 Query-Adaptive QA Prompt 

The generation prompt begins with a strict persona definition and appends specific reasoning instruc-tions dynamically based on the Router’s classifica-tion (e.g., Multi-hop, Temporal, Open-domain). 

System Prompt: Adaptive QA 

System Role: You are a precision QA assistant operating on retrieved memory contexts. Your goal is to answer the user’s question accurately using only 

the provided information. 

Context: {context} 

Current Query: 

• Question: {question} • Constraints: {category_specific_constraints} 

Instructions: 

1. Use ONLY information explicitly stated in the context. 2. If the answer is not present, respond exactly with "Information not found". 3. Be concise (typically 1–10 words) unless detailed reasoning is required. 4. {dynamic_instruction} // Automatically generated by our engine’s query classifier/router (no oracle labels) 

Answer: 

*Dynamic Instruction Injection Candi-dates: 

• [Multi-hop]: "Connect related facts across different nodes. For comparison queries (e.g., ’both/all’), identify com-monalities between entities rather than listing individual details." • [Temporal]: "Resolve relative dates (e.g., ’yesterday’) using the event timestamps. Output dates strictly in ’D Month YYYY’ format. Calculate durations if asked." • [Open-Domain/Inference]: "Make reasonable inferences based on the user’s personality traits, interests, and past behaviors. Support hypotheti-cal (’would/could’) reasoning with evidence." • [Single-hop/Factual]: "Extract the spe-cific entity, name, or method requested. Do not add explanations. Return the ex-act fact matching the query intent." 

C.3 Evaluation Prompt (LLM-as-a-Judge) 

To ensure rigorous evaluation beyond simple n-gram overlapping, we employ a semantic scor-ing mechanism. The Judge LLM evaluates the alignment between the generated response and the ground truth using the following schema. 

System Prompt: Semantic Grader 

You are an expert evaluator assessing the semantic fidelity of a memory retrieval system. Score the 

Candidate Answer against the Gold Reference on a continuous scale [0.0, 1.0]. 

Scoring Rubric: 

• 1.0 (Exact Alignment): Captures all key entities, temporal markers, and causal relationships. Semantically equivalent. • 0.8 (Substantially Correct): Main point is accurate but lacks minor nuances or secondary details. • 0.6 (Partial Match): Contains valid information but misses key constraints (e.g., wrong date but correct event). • 0.4 (Tangential): Touches on the topic but misses the core information requirement. • 0.2 (Incoherent): Factually incorrect with only minimal topical overlap. • 0.0 (Contradiction/Hallucination): Completely unrelated or contradicts the ground truth. 

Evaluation Constraints: 

1. Temporal Flexibility: Accept relative time references (e.g., "next Tuesday") if they resolve to the same period as the Gold Reference. 2. Semantic Equivalence: Prioritize informational content over lexical matching. 3. Adversarial Handling: If the Gold Reference states "Unanswerable", the Candidate MUST explicitly state lack of information. Any hallucinated fact results in 0.0. 

Input: Question: {question} | Gold: {gold} | Candidate: {generated} 

Output: JSON {"score": float, "reasoning": "concise explanation"} 

D Baseline Configurations 

To ensure a fair and rigorous comparison, we stan-dardized the experimental environment across all systems. Specifically, we adhered to the following protocols: • Full Context Baseline: We implemented a "Full Context" baseline where the entire avail-able conversation history is fed directly into the LLM’s context window (up to the 128k token limit of gpt-4o-mini ). This serves as a "brute-force" reference to evaluate the model’s native long-context capabilities with-out external retrieval mechanisms. 36861 • Retrieval-Based Baselines: For all baseline systems (e.g., AMem, Nemori, MemoryOS), we applied their official default hyperparam-eters and storage settings to reflect their stan-dard out-of-the-box performance. • Unified Backbone Model: To eliminate per-formance variance caused by different foun-dation models, all systems utilized OpenAI’s 

gpt-4o-mini for both retrieval reasoning and response generation. • Unified Evaluation: All system outputs were evaluated using the identical LLM-as-a-Judge 

framework (also powered by gpt-4o-mini 

with temperature=0.0), as detailed in Ap-pendix C. 

Dataset Statistics. We conducted a comprehen-sive evaluation on the full LoCoMo benchmark, testing across all five cognitive categories to assess varying levels of retrieval complexity. The detailed distribution of query types is presented in Table 7.        

> Table 7: Distribution of query categories in the LoCoMo benchmark used for evaluation.
> Query Category Count
> Single-Hop Retrieval 841 Adversarial 446 Temporal Reasoning 321 Multi-Hop Reasoning 282 Open Domain 96
> Total Samples 1,986

E Case Study 

To demonstrate MAGMA’s reasoning capabili-ties across different cognitive modalities, we ana-lyze three real-world scenarios from the LoCoMo benchmark. Table 8 provides a side-by-side com-parison of MAGMA against key baselines (A-MEM, Nemori, MemoryOS). 

E.1 Illustrative Walkthrough: From Memory Construction to Retrieval 

To make the case study more concrete, we briefly illustrate how MAGMA processes the Melanie ex-ample end to end. Consider three representative facts from the conversation history: (1) Melanie mentions playing the violin in an earlier session, (2) she later says that she also plays the clarinet ,and (3) in a later family-trip session, she refers to her son , two children in a photo, and a hike done 

yesterday .During memory construction, MAGMA first seg-ments these utterances into event nodes and places them along a temporal backbone. The system then incrementally enriches this memory with additional structure, such as semantic connections between related musical events, entity-centric links for re-curring references to Melanie and her family mem-bers, and normalized temporal attributes for rela-tive expressions such as yesterday . As a result, the memory is not stored as a flat list of text snippets, but as a small multi-view graph in which the same history can be accessed through different relational paths. At query time, MAGMA first identifies the dom-inant retrieval intent and then selects anchor events before traversing the most relevant graph views. For example, for “What instruments does Melanie play?” , retrieval focuses on the entity and semantic views, allowing MAGMA to aggregate both the ear-lier violin mention and the later clarinet mention. For “How many children does Melanie have?” ,retrieval centers on the local entity neighborhood, combining the references to a son , two children ,and brother into a single evidence set. For “When did she hike?” , MAGMA relies primarily on the temporal view, using the normalized representation of yesterday to recover the grounded date. This example highlights the key intuition behind MAGMA: memory construction organizes con-versational history into complementary relational views, and query-time retrieval activates different parts of this structure depending on the reasoning need. 

E.2 Detailed Analysis Case 1: Overcoming Information Loss (Re-call). For the query regarding instruments, A-MEM failed completely due to its summarization process abstracting away specific details ("violin") from early sessions. Other RAG baselines only re-trieved the "clarinet" due to surface-level semantic matching. MAGMA, however, maintains an entity-centric graph structure. Instead of relying on rigid schemas, MAGMA queries the local neighborhood of the [Entity: Melanie] node. This allows it to capture diverse natural language predicates (e.g., "playing my violin", "started clarinet") and aggre-gate disjoint facts into a comprehensive answer, demonstrating robustness against information loss. 36862 Table 8: Case study for failure analysis comparing MAGMA against baselines across three reasoning types. Red text indicates hallucinations or partial failures; Teal text indicates correct reasoning derived from graph traversal.                                   

> Query & Type Baseline Failure Mode MAGMA Graph Reasoning (Success) Fact Q1: Fact Retrieval
> "What instruments does Melanie play?"
> A-MEM: "Memories do not explicitly state..."
> MemoryOS: "Clarinet"
> Failure: Baselines relying on top-k vector search missed the distant memory of the "vi-olin" (D2:5) because it appeared in a context about "me-time" rather than explicitly about music.
> "Clarinet and Violin."
> Mechanism: MAGMA utilized the entity-centric subgraph around "Melanie". By traversing dynamic semantic edges (e.g., "playing", "enjoy") to connected event nodes, it aggregated all mentions of musical activ-ities regardless of the specific relation label or distance.
> Logic
> Q2: Logical Infer-ence
> "How many children does Melanie have?"
> Nemori: "At least two..."
> MemoryOS: "Two"
> Failure: Baselines performed surface-level extraction from a photo description showing "two children" (D18:5), failing to account for the "son" mentioned in a separate accident event.
> "At least three."
> Mechanism: MAGMA executed multi-hop inference focused on Entity Resolution : 1. Node A (Photo): Identified "two kids" entity. 2. Node B (Accident): Linked "son" (D18:1) via a dynamic relationship edge. 3. Node C (Dialogue): Confirmed "brother" (D18:7) is distinct from the two in the photo. →Logic:
> 2(Photo) + 1 (Son/Brother) = 3 .
> Time
> Q3: Temporal Res.
> "When did she hike af-ter the roadtrip?"
> A-MEM: "20 October 2023"
> MemoryOS: "29 December 2025"
> Failure: A-MEM simply copied the session timestamp. MemoryOS hallucinated a future date. Both failed to resolve the relative time expression.
> "19 October 2023"
> Mechanism: MAGMA’s Temporal Parser identified the relative marker "yesterday" in D18:17. Calculation: Tsession (Oct 20) −
> 1day =Oct 19 .This exact date was an-chored to the Event Node, allowing precise retrieval.

Case 2: Multi-Hop Reasoning vs. Surface Ex-traction. The query "How many children?" ex-poses a critical weakness in standard RAG: the inability to perform arithmetic across contexts. Baselines simply extracted the explicit mention of "two children" from a photo caption. In contrast, MAGMA treated this as a graph traversal problem focused on entity resolution. It queried the neigh-borhood of [Entity: Melanie] for connected nodes of type Person . By analyzing the semantic edges, specifically distinguishing the "two kids" entity in the canyon photo from the "son" entity involved in the car accident, MAGMA synthesized these distinct nodes. It correctly deduced that the "son" (referenced later as "brother") was an addi-tional individual, summing up to a count of "at least three," a logical leap impossible for systems relying solely on vector similarity. 

Case 3: Temporal Grounding. When asked "When did she hike?", baselines either halluci-nated or defaulted to the conversation timestamp (Oct 20). This ignores the semantic meaning of the user’s statement: "we just did it yester-day ." MAGMA’s structured ingestion pipeline nor-malizes relative dates during graph construction. The event was stored with the resolved attribute 

date="2023-10-19" , making the retrieval trivial and exact, completely bypassing the ambiguity that confused the LLM-based baselines. 

F Metric Validation Analysis 

To validate our choice of using an LLM-based Judge over traditional lexical metrics, we con-ducted a granular failure analysis on seven represen-tative test cases. Table 10 details the quantitative breakdown. 

F.1 Rationale for Semantic Scoring 

Our empirical results reveal two critical failure modes where standard metrics (F1, BLEU-1) di-rectly contradict human judgment: 1. False Rewards (The “Hallucination” Prob-lem): Lexical metrics heavily reward incorrect answers that share surface-level tokens. • In Case 3, a direct negation (“compatible” vs. “ not compatible”) yields a remark-ably high F1 of 0.857, treating a fatal contradiction as a near-perfect match. • In Case 6, substituting the wrong entity (“John” vs. “Sarah”) still achieves F1 36863 Table 9: LoCoMo evaluation with F1 and BLEU-1 metrics                                                                 

> Multi-Hop Temporal Open-Domain Single-Hop Overall Method F1 BLEU-1 F1 BLEU-1 F1 BLEU-1 F1 BLEU-1 F1 BLEU-1 Full Context 0.182 0.128 0.079 0.055 0.042 0.030 0.229 0.156 0.140 0.096 A-MEM 0.128 0.088 0.128 0.079 0.076 0.051 0.174 0.110 0.116 0.074 MemoryOS 0.365 0.276 0.434 0.369 0.246 0.191 0.493 0.437 0.413 0.355 Nemori 0.363 0.249 0.569 0.479 0.247 0.189 0.548 0.439 0.502 0.403 MAGMA (ours) 0.264 0.172 0.509 0.370 0.180 0.136 0.551 0.477 0.467 0.378

0.750 , rewarding the hallucinatory out-put. 2. False Penalties (The “Phrasing” Problem): Valid answers with different formatting or syn-onyms are unfairly penalized. • In Case 4 (Time Notation) and Case 5 (Synonyms), F1 and BLEU scores drop to 0.000 despite the answers being se-mantically identical. As shown in Table 10, the LLM-Judge correctly assigns a score of 0.0 to factual errors and 1.0 to se-mantic matches, aligning perfectly with reasoning requirements. 36864 Table 10: Quantitative Failure Analysis of Lexical Metrics. We present seven controlled cases with their calculated F1 and BLEU-1 scores. The data demonstrates that lexical metrics frequently assign high scores to fatal errors (False Rewards) and zero scores to correct variations (False Penalties), whereas the LLM-Judge correctly assesses semantic validity. 

Failure Mode Case Detail (Gold / Predicted) Lexical Met-rics 

(F1 / BLEU-1) 

LLM Judge 

(Semantic) 

Case 1: False Reward 

(Wrong Fact, High Overlap) 

Gold: “three items” 

Pred: “five items” 

Analysis: Factually wrong count, but rewarded for sharing the noun “items”. 

High 

0.500 / 0.500 

0.0 

(Reject) 

Case 2: False Penalty 

(Verbose Phrasing) 

Gold: “18 days” 

Pred: “The total duration was 18 days” 

Analysis: Correct answer penalized for low pre-cision due to extra words. 

Low 

0.500 / 0.333 

1.0 

(Accept) 

Case 3: False Reward 

(Negation/Contradiction) 

Gold: “compatible with Mac” 

Pred: “not compatible with Mac” 

Analysis: Fatal contradiction receives near-perfect scores due to high token overlap. 

Very High 

0.857 / 0.750 

0.0 

(Reject) 

Case 4: False Penalty 

(Time Notation) 

Gold: “14:00” 

Pred: “2 PM” 

Analysis: Different formats result in zero over-lap despite identical meaning. 

Zero 

0.000 / 0.000 

1.0 

(Accept) 

Case 5: False Penalty 

(Synonyms) 

Gold: “cheap” 

Pred: “inexpensive” 

Analysis: Standard metrics cannot handle syn-onym matching without external resources. 

Zero 

0.000 / 0.000 

1.0 

(Accept) 

Case 6: False Reward 

(Entity Hallucination) 

Gold: “John completed the project” 

Pred: “Sarah completed the project” 

Analysis: Wrong entity (Sarah vs John), yet high metrics due to shared sentence structure. 

High 

0.750 / 0.750 

0.0 

(Reject) 

Case 7: False Penalty 

(Format Noise) 

Gold: “5” 

Pred: “5 (extracted from JSON...)” 

Analysis: Correct value embedded in noise re-sults in poor precision metrics. 

Low 

0.286 / 0.167 

1.0 

(Accept) 36865