Title: 2026.acl-long.1874.pdf

URL Source: https://aclanthology.org/2026.acl-long.1874.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 11 Jun 2026 01:29:03 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
> Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 40371–40391 July 2-7, 2026 ©2026 Association for Computational Linguistics

# GROKE: Vision-Free Navigation Instruction Evaluation via Graph Reasoning on OpenStreetMap 

Farzad Shami  Subhrasankha Dey  Nico Van de Weghe Henrikki Tenkanen 

Aalto University Ghent University    

> Q:{farzad.shami, subhrasankha.dey, henrikki.tenkanen}@aalto.fi, nico.vandeweghe@ugent.be
> : Geo-R2LLM.github.io/groke

Abstract 

The evaluation of navigation instructions re-mains a persistent challenge in Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) research. Tradi-tional reference-based metrics such as BLEU and ROUGE fail to capture the functional util-ity of spatial directives, specifically whether an instruction successfully guides a navigator to the intended destination. Although existing VLN agents could serve as evaluators, their reliance on high-fidelity visual simulators intro-duces licensing constraints and computational costs, and perception errors further confound linguistic quality assessment. This paper in-troduces GROKE (Graph-based Reasoning over 

OSM Knowledge for instruction Evaluation), a vision-free training-free hierarchical LLM-based framework for evaluating navigation in-structions using OpenStreetMap data. Through systematic ablation studies, we demonstrate that structured JSON and textual formats for spatial information substantially outperform grid-based and visual graph representations. Our hierarchical architecture combines sub-instruction planning with topological graph navigation, reducing navigation error by 68.5% compared to heuristic and sampling baselines on the Map2Seq dataset. The agent’s execu-tion success, trajectory fidelity, and decision patterns serve as proxy metrics for functional navigability given OSM-visible landmarks and topology, establishing a scalable and inter-pretable evaluation paradigm without visual dependencies. 

1 Introduction 

Evaluation Deficits in Embodied Systems. The intersection of Natural Language Processing ( NLP )and robotics has given rise to the field of Em-bodied AI (Tellex et al., 2020; Duan et al., 2022; Anderson et al., 2018b), where agents must per-ceive, reason, and act within physical environments based on linguistic directives (Cong and Mo, 2025; 

Figure 1: Comparison of traditional textual metrics and proposed pragmatic evaluation metrics. 

Gu et al., 2022). Within this domain, Vision-and-Language Navigation ( VLN ) has emerged as a flag-ship task, requiring agents to navigate complex 3D environments following natural language instruc-tions (Krantz et al., 2020; Ku et al., 2020). While significant progress has been made in developing agents that can follow instructions – evidenced by performance gains on benchmarks like Room-to-Room (R2R) (Anderson et al., 2018c) and Touch-down (Chen et al., 2019) – a critical and often over-looked component of this ecosystem is the evalu-ation of the instructions themselves. This paper addresses the evaluation of navigation instructions rather than the navigation agents that execute them, focusing on whether instructions themselves are clear and navigable. Historically, the navigability of navigation in-structions, whether generated by humans or auto-mated “Speaker” models, has been assessed us-ing reference-based metrics adapted from machine translation and image captioning. Metrics such as BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002), ROUGE (Lin, 2004), METEOR (Banerjee and Lavie, 2005), and 

40371 CIDEr (Vedantam et al., 2015) calculate n-gram overlaps between a candidate instruction and a “gold standard” reference instruction. This method-ology rests on the precarious assumption that there is a single correct way to describe a route and that lexical similarity correlates with functional utility. However, in the context of spatial navigation, this assumption breaks down (Zhao et al., 2021; Jain et al., 2019). An instruction that states “Turn left at the bank” shares high lexical overlap with 

“Turn right at the bank,” yet the functional outcome of following these two directives is diametrically opposed. Conversely, “Go past the drug store and turn left.” and “Take a left before the light on your right.” may share zero n-grams but describe the exact same valid action. The “meaning” of a navigation instruction is not defined by its syntax but by its compliance condi-tions – the set of physical trajectories that satisfy the directive (Ilharco et al., 2019). This disconnect creates a bottleneck in the advancement of Human-Robot Interaction ( HRI ) (Fong et al., 2004). If we cannot accurately measure the navigability of an in-struction, we cannot train systems to generate better ones, nor can we filter low-quality human data from training sets. Previous work (Chen et al., 2023) shows that automatically filtering low-quality data can improve model training in general domains. Addressing this requires a shift from intrinsic, text-based evaluation to extrinsic, pragmatic evaluation, where the navigability of an instruction is measured by the success of a rational agent attempting to fol-low it. 

Visual Reliance in Pragmatic Evaluation. Ex-isting attempts to implement pragmatic evaluation typically involve training a “follower” agent (Fried et al., 2018; Anderson et al., 2018a) to execute instructions in a simulator and measuring its suc-cess rate. If the agent succeeds, the instruction is deemed good; if it fails, the instruction is deemed bad. While theoretically sound, the practical im-plementation of this approach has been heavily reliant on high-fidelity visual simulators like Mat-terport3D or Google Street View (GSV) (Anderson et al., 2018b; Chang et al., 2017; Schumann and Riezler, 2021). This reliance on photorealistic visual inputs in-troduces several critical issues. First, it conflates linguistic quality with visual recognition capabili-ties (Wang et al., 2019). If an evaluation agent fails to execute an instruction because it cannot iden-tify a “stucco wall” in a grainy panoramic image, the failure is attributed to the instruction, even if the text was perfectly clear. This introduces noise into the evaluation metric, making it difficult to isolate the quality of the Natural Language Gen-eration ( NLG ) from the agent’s computer vision performance. Second, the reliance on proprietary datasets like GSV creates significant barriers to reproducibility 1 and scalability for out-door navi-gation. Researchers must grapple with API costs, licensing restrictions, and the sheer data volume of downloading terabytes of panoramic imagery. This effectively limits the accessibility of pragmatic evaluation to well-funded labs and hinders the de-mocratization of VLN research. In addition, previous work shows that Vision-Language-Action ( VLA ) models fail in clutter not because control is weak, but because perception collapses (Vo et al., 2025). In real scenes, they over-grasp, chase distractors, and act even when the target is absent. The Map2Seq dataset (Schumann and Riezler, 2021) presents a unique opportunity to address these limitations. Unlike Touchdown, which is inextricably linked to GSV panoramas, map2seq provides aligned Open Street Map ( OSM ) data – nodes, edges, and Point of Interests ( POI s) – along-side navigation routes. This allows for a decoupling of the visual and linguistic modalities. By abstract-ing the environment into a semantic representation derived from OSM , we can build evaluation agents that reason over map features rather than raw pix-els. This not only removes the visual recognition bottleneck but also allows for the evaluation of in-structions based on their structural and semantic logic, which is arguably the most critical aspect of human-generated navigation guidance. 

Research Objectives. This research presents a novel methodological approach to evaluate naviga-tion instructions. Rather than asking “How well did the agent perform?” we ask “How navigable is this instruction?” This inversion of the standard VLN problem formulation allows us to treat the agent’s performance metrics (execution success, trajectory fidelity, and decision entropy) as proxy scores for the navigability of the input text. Our specific research objectives are as follows: First, we aim to develop a visually agnostic 

> 1https://about.google/intl/en-GB_ALL/ brand-resource-center/products-and-services/ geo-guidelines/

40372 environmental representation by transforming the sparse vector data of Map2Seq into structured spa-tial representations that capture topological connec-tivity, geometric layout, and semantic landmarks. Through systematic comparison of multiple encod-ing strategies (i.e., textual narratives, structured JSON graphs, grid-based matrices, and GraphViz-style visualizations), we identify which represen-tation formats enable optimal LLM reasoning for navigation tasks. Our ablation studies, investigate whether dense grid rasterization or structured tex-tual schemas provide better foundation for spatial reasoning in language models. Second, we aim to design a hierarchical agent in-spired by embodied AI and construct an agent that separates high-level instruction parsing from low-level path planning. The Sub-instruction Agent decomposes natural language instructions into atomic sub-goals and extracts landmark references, while the Navigator Agent executes these sub-goals through iterative waypoint selection. This hierar-chical decomposition reduces the complexity of long-horizon navigation by creating manageable action sequences that can be tracked and validated independently. Third, we establish a suite of evaluation metrics for instruction navigability, we adapt standard VLN metrics (Navigation Error, Success Rate, Oracle Success Rate, and Success weighted by Dynamic Time Warping) to serve as inverse indicators of in-struction navigability. When an agent successfully follows an instruction with low navigation error and high path fidelity, this suggests the instruction itself is well-formed and navigable. Conversely, high error rates and trajectory deviations may in-dicate ambiguous or underspecified instructions, even when the ground truth path is known. 

Contribution. We propose GROKE (Graph-based 

Reasoning over OSM Knowledge for instruction 

Evaluation), a modular system for the agentic eval-uation of navigation instructions. The contributions are three-fold. (1) GROKE systematically compares four spatial representation formats, and demonstrate that structured JSON significantly outperform rep-resentations in this task. Our ablation studies reveal that JSON format achieves Navigation Error of 41.3 (m) and Success Rate of 74.0%. (2) GROKE formalizes the Agent-as-Judge method-ology, providing an experimental protocol to validate the evaluator itself. We address the “meta-evaluation” problem – how to ensure the judge is accurate – by correlating agentic metrics with human judgments of instruction clarity and by performing studies on map rep-resentations and instruction segmentation. (3) Within GROKE , we provide a detailed imple-mentation of this framework, including spe-cific algorithmic descriptions for graph seri-alization, prompt engineering strategies for hierarchical reasoning, and statistical methods for analyzing agent trajectories. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review related work in naviga-tion instruction evaluation and VLN . In Section 3, we introduce the GROKE agent architecture and its core components. We detail the GROKE construc-tion in Section 4, covering dataset preparation and implementation details alongside experimental re-sults. Finally, in Section 5, we draw some final remarks. Section A presents systematic ablation studies examining spatial representation formats, sub-instruction planning effectiveness, POI detec-tion accuracy, and the impact of Large Language Model ( LLM ) thinking procedures on navigation performance. 

2 Background & Related Work 

Transition from Vision-Dependent to Graph-Based Navigation. The task of VLN was es-tablished by the Room-to-Room (R2R) (Ander-son et al., 2018c) benchmark, which defined the task of grounding natural language instructions into actions within widely used Matterport3D envi-ronments. While subsequent datasets like Touch-down (Chen et al., 2019; Mehta et al., 2020) extended this formulation to outdoor urban set-tings using Google Street View panoramas, these vision-dependent approaches face significant scal-ability challenges. Specifically, reliance on high-resolution imagery introduces critical barriers re-lated to privacy regulations, incomplete geographic coverage, and the temporal outdatedness of static captures. Consequently, recent research has pivoted toward map-based methodologies (Schumann and Riezler, 2022). Work such as Map2Seq (Schumann and Riezler, 2021) has demonstrated that struc-tured geographic data from OSM can effectively substitute for visual imagery. By encoding routes into location-invariant graph representations, these 40373 approaches enable scalable navigation instruction tasks without the computational overhead or pri-vacy constraints inherent to visual processing. 

Spatial Representation for Language Model Reasoning The effectiveness of LLM s in nav-igation depends on spatial encoding format. Stud-ies indicate structured textual representations of-ten rival visual inputs for spatial reasoning. For example, STMR (Gao et al., 2024) substantially reduced Navigation Error by combining semantic labels with topological connectivity. Furthermore, “Talk like a Graph” (Fatemi et al., 2024) reveals that encoding choices, such as incident encoding, can boost performance significantly for graph rea-soning problems. This is supported by findings from MapGPT (Chen et al., 2024), where online-constructed linguistic topological maps enabled “global-view” reasoning that purely local visual observations could not support. These results val-idate the use of symbolic formats, such as JSON-encoded OSM data, as a robust alternative to visual perception for driving LLM -based agents (Xie and Schwertfeger, 2024). 

Agent-Based Evaluation and Metric Evolution 

The evaluation of navigation instructions has his-torically relied on reference-based text metrics like BLEU; however, even with available references, these metrics often fail to capture the functional utility required for successful navigation (Zhao et al., 2021). To address this, the field has adopted an agent-based evaluation philosophy, exemplified by the Speaker-Follower paradigm, where instruc-tion quality is measured by the navigational suc-cess of a follower agent. This shift requires met-rics that capture both goal completion and trajec-tory fidelity. Although success weighted by Path Length (SPL) penalizes inefficient exploration, it allows agents to take shortcuts that ignore instruc-tions (Jain et al., 2019). Therefore, metrics such as normalized Dynamic Time Warping (nDTW) and Success weighted by DTW (SDTW) are essential for ensuring that agents adhere to the intended path. Contemporary hierarchical architectures, such as those seen in VELMA (Schumann et al., 2024) and NavGPT (Zhou et al., 2024), leverage these insights by separating high-level reasoning from low-level execution, confirming that functional nav-igation performance is the most reliable proxy for instruction quality. 

3 Methodology 

In this section, we explore how navigation perfor-mance can be enhanced by structuring the decision space through hierarchical instruction decomposi-tion and structured spatial representations. We be-gin with an overview of the navigation task and in-troduce our proposed agentic system for action pre-diction ( § 3.1). We then present two core modules of our approach: (1) the Sub-instruction Agent for instruction parsing and landmark extraction ( § 3.2), and (2) the Navigator Agent for spatial reasoning and waypoint selection ( § 3.3). 

3.1 Overview Problem Formulation. We formalize the task of VLN on OSM as a sequential decision-making problem in a graph-structured environment. Let 

I = {w1, w 2, . . . , w L} be a natural language in-struction consisting of L words. Let G = ( V, E, P )

represent the OSM graph, where V denotes the set of navigable nodes (street intersections and waypoints), E denotes the set of directed edges connecting nodes with associated headings, and 

P denotes the set of POIs with spatial coordinates and semantic tags. Let τ ∗ = {v1, v 2, . . . , v T } be the ground-truth navigation trajectory, represented as a sequence of nodes vt ∈ V from the starting location v1 to the goal location vT .The navigation task is to find a policy π that predicts the next waypoint vt+1 given the instruc-tion I, the current position vt, the current heading 

ht ∈ [0 , 360) degrees, and the local map context 

Gt visible from the current position: 

π : ( I, v t, h t, Gt) → vt+1 

The agent’s objective is to maximize the proba-bility of reaching the goal location while following the instruction accurately: 

π∗ = arg max  

> π

P (τagent ≈ τ ∗|I, G)

where τagent = {v1, π (I, v 1, h 1, G1), . . . } is the predicted trajectory generated by the agent’s policy. 

System Architecture. We implement a training-free multi-agent hierarchical system (i.e., GROKE )that decomposes the navigation problem into two stages (Figure 2, left). First, a Sub-instruction Agent parses the full instruction I into a sequence of sub-goals {g1, g 2, . . . , g K } and extracts land-mark references. Second, a Navigator Agent iter-atively executes each sub-goal by reasoning over 40374 Figure 2: (Left) GROKE consists of three modules: Sub-Goal & POI Extraction, Visible Area Construction, and Navigator Agent. These modules generate sub-goal instructions, construct spatial information representations for the surrounding area, and traverse the graph, respectively. (Right) Visible Area Construction in detail: The map highlights the distinction between different kinds of nodes for immediate local context construction. It demonstrates how the system filters out distant data using visibility thresholds to construct the immediate navigable context. 

structured spatial representations of the local en-vironment. The Navigator Agent continues exe-cuting the current sub-goal until completion, then advances to the next sub-goal. This hierarchical decomposition reduces the complexity of long-horizon navigation by creating manageable action sequences. At each navigation step, the system constructs a local spatial context Gt by extracting the visi-ble area from the current position. This visible area includes all nodes, edges, and POI s within a defined visibility range (measured in intersection units). The Navigator Agent receives this spatial information in structured formats and predicts the next waypoint vt+1 that advances progress toward completing the current sub-goal. 

3.2 Sub-instruction Agent 

The Sub-instruction Agent transforms the natural language instruction I into structured, machine-readable components that can be executed sequen-tially. This agent performs two primary functions: (1) decomposing the instruction into atomic sub-goals, and (2) extracting and categorizing landmark references. 

Sub-goal Decomposition. We define a sub-goal gk as an atomic navigation action that cor-responds to one of three primitive operations: 

MOVE_FORWARD (proceed along the current path), 

TURN_LEFT (change heading by approximately 90 ◦

counterclockwise), or TURN_RIGHT (change head-ing by approximately 90 ◦ clockwise). The agent uses an LLM -based parser to segment the instruc-tion I into a sequence of sub-goals: 

I parse 

−−−→ { g1, g 2, . . . , g K }

Each sub-goal gk is associated with a natural lan-guage description (e.g., “Go straight to the bank” )and a status indicator ( IN_PROGRESS , COMPLETED ,or TODO ). The decomposition follows spatial and temporal relationships expressed in the instruction, preserving the sequential order of the actions. 

Landmark Extraction and Grounding. The Sub-instruction Agent identifies all landmark ref-erences in I and categorizes them according to their semantic type. We define the landmarks 

L = {l1, l 2, . . . , l M } as physical entities men-tioned in the instruction, where each landmark lm

has a name and a category (amenity, traffic con-trol, etc.). After extraction, we perform landmark grounding to associate each instruction landmark with its corresponding POI nodes on the map graph 

G. We use fuzzy string matching with the Rapid-Fuzz library (Bachmann, 2025) to match landmark names to POI tags: sim (lm, p i) = partial_ratio (name (lm), tags (pi)) 

where pi ∈ P is a POI on the map. A match is established when similarity (lm, p i) > τ , where τ

represents the similarity threshold. Each grounded landmark is assigned a unique letter identifier (A, B, C, etc.) for reference in the navigation prompts. 

3.3 Navigator Agent 

The Navigator Agent executes the sequence of sub-goals by iteratively selecting waypoints that ad-vance progress toward sub-goal completion. At 40375 Algorithm 1 Visible Area Construction                                                                                       

> Require: node vt, heading ht, visibility units u
> Ensure: Path node set Vpath
> 1: Initialize Vpath ← { vt},vcurr ←vt,hcurr ←ht
> 2: nintersections ←0
> 3: while nintersections < u and iterations <1000 do
> 4: if degree (vcurr )>2then
> 5: nintersections ←nintersections + 1
> 6: end if
> 7: Get neighbors N(vcurr ) = {v′|(vcurr , v ′)∈E}
> 8: for each v′∈N(vcurr )do
> 9: hv′←bearing (vcurr , v ′)
> 10: end for
> 11: vnext ←arg min v′∈N(vcurr )∆h(hcurr , h v′)
> 12: where ∆h(h1, h 2) = min( |h1−h2|,360 −| h1−h2|)
> 13: if ∆h(hcurr , h vnext )<100 ◦then
> 14: Vpath ←Vpath ∪ { vnext }
> 15: vcurr ←vnext ,hcurr ←hvnext
> 16: else
> 17: break
> 18: end if
> 19: end while
> 20: Continue for 3 additional nodes for lookahead context 21: return Vpath

each step t, the agent receives the current sub-goal 

gk, the current position vt, the current heading ht,and the visible area Gt. The agent outputs a predic-tion: output t = ( status k, v t+1 )

where status k ∈ {IN_PROGRESS , COMPLETED }

indicates whether sub-goal gk has been satisfied, and vt+1 ∈ V is the next waypoint to navigate toward. 

Visible Area Construction. The visible area Gt

represents the spatial context perceived from the current position. In our implementation, this con-struction simulates human navigation by defining visibility as the forward view along the street to the next intersection. We model this visible area by traversing the current heading direction to the next topological node in the street network. Given the current node vt and heading ht, we construct Gt by traversing forward until we reach a specified number of intersections (visibility units 

u). An intersection is defined as a node v where degree (v) > 2, indicating a branching point that requires a navigation decision. The algorithm de-scribed in Algorithm 1. The bearing between two nodes is calculated us-ing the spherical bearing formula (Figure 2, right): 

y = sin(∆ λ) cos( ϕ2)

x = cos( ϕ1) sin( ϕ2) − sin( ϕ1) cos( ϕ2) cos(∆ λ)

h = atan2( y, x )

where (ϕ1, λ 1) and (ϕ2, λ 2) are the latitude and longitude of the two nodes in radians, and ∆λ =

λ2 − λ1. The result is normalized to the range 

[0 , 360) degrees. 

POI Proximity Mapping. For each node v ∈

Vpath on the visible path, we identify nearby POI swithin a maximum distance threshold dmax = 50 

meters. For each grounded landmark lm with POI set ϕ(lm), we calculate the Haversine distance (In-man, 1849) between each POI p ∈ ϕ(lm) and each path node v ∈ Vpath . Then we calculate its relative direction with respect to the current heading. The bearing hv→p from node v to POI p is calculated using the spherical bearing formula. The relative direction is then determined by the angular differ-ence: 

δ = ( hv→p − hcurr + 180) mod 360 − 180 

The relative direction is classified as follows:  

> direction

=

                   

> Forward if −45 ◦≤δ≤45 ◦
> Left if −135 ◦≤δ < −45 ◦
> Right if 45 ◦< δ ≤135 ◦
> Back otherwise

Action Prediction. After receiving the agent’s prediction output t, the system updates the naviga-tion state. If sk = COMPLETED , the current sub-goal index is incremented ( k ← k + 1 ) and the retry counter is reset. If sk = IN_PROGRESS , the agent moves to the predicted waypoint vt+1 while main-taining the same sub-goal. The new heading is calculated as: 

ht+1 = bearing (vt, v t+1 )

The navigation process continues until one of the following termination conditions is met: (1) all sub-goals are completed ( k > K ), (2) the maxi-mum total step count is exceeded (100 steps), or (3) the maximum retry count for a single sub-goal is exceeded (15 retries). These threshold values were empirically determined based on the environment characteristics. 

4 Experiment 

4.1 Dataset and Implementation Details Dataset. We conducted experiments using two test sets from the Map2Seq dataset (Schumann and Riezler, 2021), which we refer to as TestSet A and TestSet B 2. Each dataset contain 700 navigation 

> 2These correspond to the Test_Seen and Test_Unseen splits respectively in the original Map2Seq dataset.

40376 Table 1: Summary of TestSet A and TestSet B from the Map2Seq dataset.          

> TestSet ATestSet B
> Num. of Instances 700 700 Avg. Token Length 53.5 54.2 Landmarks per Instance 2.72 2.69 Human Nav. Success Rate 0.86 0.84

instances with average instruction lengths of 53.5 and 54.2 tokens respectively. The complete dataset comprises 7,672 crowd-sourced instructions that distinguish themselves from prior work by utilizing a top-down map interface rather than ego-centric panoramic imagery. Annotators were directed to guide a tourist using OSM points of interest, which resulted in directions focused on physical objects with an average of 2.7 landmark references per instance. The effectiveness of this approach was confirmed by human navigators who achieved suc-cess rates of 0.86 and 0.84 on the TestSet A and TestSet B respectively within a Street View envi-ronment. Table 1 summarizes the key statistics for each of these datasets. 

Evaluation Metrics. Following the evaluation protocols in (Liu et al., 2023), we validate our method using four core metrics. Navigation Error (NE) measures the Euclidean distance between the agent’s final position and the ground truth destina-tion. Success Rate (SR) indicates the percentage of episodes terminating within 25 meters of the target, while Oracle Success Rate (OSR) is a lenient metric that considers a trial successful if any point on the trajectory falls within this radius. Finally, Normal-ized Dynamic Time Warping (SDTW) evaluates path fidelity by combining binary success status with geometric similarity to the ground truth. 

Implementation Details. We implemented our agentic system using the open-source Google Agent Development Kit (ADK) 3 for real-time eval-uation of navigation instructions, alongside stan-dalone scripts to generate and analyze step-by-step requests. These scripts operate in batch mode to evaluate results collectively, which lowers costs. For LLM reasoning, we utilize the online and batch APIs of Gemini, specifically the Gemini-3 Pro model with default parameters (temperature 1.0, and without explicitly defining the thinking level, which defaults to high). Detailed design choices 

> 3https://google.github.io/adk-docs/

are provided in Appendix A, and the full prompts can be found in Appendix B. 

4.2 Experimental Results Baseline Models. To assess the complexity of the navigation task and quantify the contribution of semantic reasoning of LLM agents, we imple-mented three distinct baseline agents. First, the Random Walker serves as a stochastic baseline to determine the “chance” level of success, selecting outgoing edges uniformly at random at every inter-section to provide a fundamental lower bound. Sec-ond, we employed a rule-based Heuristic Agent to test if navigation is solvable via explicit geometric cues; this agent extracts directional keywords (e.g., 

“turn left” , “bear right” ) using regular expressions from the navigation instruction and greedily se-lects the edge best aligned with the command’s angle. Finally, the Action Sampling baseline in-vestigates dataset bias by disregarding instruction text entirely and sampling actions based on the pre-computed global probability distribution of ground-truth movements (e.g., the likelihood of moving 

“forward” versus “left” at intersections). 

Quantitative Results. The experimental results (Table 2) demonstrate that our method consistently outperforms these fundamental baselines across all metrics on both TestSet A and TestSet B environ-ments, validating that semantic reasoning provides measurable value beyond chance performance and simple geometric heuristics. Specifically regarding the SR and NE, the proposed method shows sub-stantial superiority over the best-performing base-line Heuristic Agent. In the TestSet A the method attains an SR of 66.4% and an NE of 56.8 while the Heuristic Agent is limited to 18.0% and 180.6 respectively. A similar performance pattern is evi-dent in the TestSet B split. These findings validate the premise that structured semantic reasoning pro-vides a viable alternative approach to high-fidelity visual simulations in determining instruction nav-igability. Additionally Table 3 reports the com-putational cost statistics concerning the average steps and token usage. The results on TestSet A

and TestSet B indicate that the agent takes approxi-mately 5.91 to 6.15 steps on average (median ˜x = 6 

for both). The resource consumption is further de-tailed with Avg. Total Tokens reaching 44,438 for the TestSet A and 46,305 for the TestSet B .

Impact of Hierarchical Decomposition. To iso-late the contribution of our Sub-instruction Agent, 40377 Table 2: Overall navigation execution results; Best-performing baseline methods underlined. 

Method TestSet A TestSet B

NE ↓ SR ↑ OSR ↑ SDTW ↑ NE ↓ SR ↑ OSR ↑ SDTW ↑

Random Walker 259.0 4.4% 5.7% 0.026 244.3 6.1% 7.1% 0.029 Action Sampling 250.1 5.1% 6.0% 0.037 241.6 7.4% 8.1% 0.039 Heuristic Agent 180.6 18.0% 18.9% 0.155 173.0 17.9% 19.1% 0.159 

Ours ( GROKE) 56.8 66.4% 78.4% 0.634 59.8 63.3% 78.0% 0.609 

Table 3: Computational cost statistics comparing aver-age steps and token usage on TestSet A and TestSet B .       

> TestSet ATestSet B
> Avg. Steps 5.91 6.15 Avg. Thoughts Tokens 23,044 24,000 Avg. Total Tokens 44,438 46,305

we compare three instruction feeding strategies on 100 validation instances: (1) providing the com-plete instruction as a single prompt, (2) a rule-based split that segments the text at sentence bound-aries, and (3) our LLM Divider, which decomposes instructions into semantically grounded sub-goals (§3.2). As shown in Table 4, the LLM-based de-composition reduces NE by 42.6% relative to the complete-instruction baseline (41.3 m vs. 71.9 m) and raises SR from 51.0% to 74.0%. Compared to rule-based splitting, the LLM Divider still yields a 29.3% reduction in NE and a 20-percentage-point gain in SR. These results confirm that context-aware segmentation into atomic sub-goals – rather than merely shorter text spans – is a key enabler of the agent’s spatial reasoning. Notably, the ad-vantage is most pronounced on hard instructions, where the LLM Divider achieves a SR of 53.8% compared to 23.1% for the complete-instruction variant. The complete difficulty-stratified results are provided in Appendix A.2. 

Table 4: Impact of sub-instruction decomposition on overall navigation performance (aggregated over 100 validation instances).                     

> Method NE ↓SR ↑OSR ↑nDTW ↑
> Complete Instruction 71.9 51.0% 55.0% 0.496 Rule-based Split 58.4 54.0% 69.0% 0.509
> LLM Divider (Ours) 41.3 74.0% 82.0% 0.714

Correlation Analysis. We randomly sample 100 instructions from Map2Seq Test_Seen. We present these instructions (along with a static map view) to 

Table 5: Correlation Analysis: Human Annotations vs Navigation Metrics ( n = 100 ). The metric with the strongest correlation magnitude per column is high-lighted in bold . Significance levels are indicated by ** (p < 0.01 ) and * ( p < 0.05 ).                           

> Metric Pearson Correlation Spearman Correlation
> rp-value ρp-value
> SR 0.2865** 0.0039 0.2865** 0.0039 OSR 0.1860 0.0639 0.1860 0.0639 SDTW 0.2799** 0.0048 0.2860** 0.0039 nDTW 0.2457* 0.0138 0.2895** 0.0035 NE -0.3096** 0.0017 -0.3184** 0.0012
> Note: NE shows a negative correlation, indicating alignment with correct human annotations (lower error = higher score).

human annotators and ask them to rate the “Navi-gability” on a binary scale. The human annotators achieved a SR of 86%, compared to 74% achieved by the autonomous navigator. For a more detailed explanation of the navigator’s architecture and con-figuration, refer to Appendix A. Then, we compute the Pearson and Spearman rank coefficients be-tween the human ratings and our metrics (i.e., SR, OSR, NE, SDTW, and nDTW)). The results, presented in Table 5, reveal a statis-tically significant alignment between human judg-ment and most automated metrics. Notably, NE demonstrated the strongest correlation with hu-man annotations across both Pearson ( r = −0.31 ,

p < 0.01 ) and Spearman ( ρ = −0.32 , p < 0.01 )coefficients. The negative correlation confirms that lower navigation errors consistently correspond to higher human ratings of trajectory quality. Further-more, while SR and SDTW showed moderate posi-tive correlations ( r ≈ 0.29 ), OSR failed to achieve statistical significance ( p > 0.05 ), suggesting it may be a less reliable proxy for human-perceived navigation quality in this context. These findings support the use of NE and nDTW as primary met-rics for evaluating agent performance when human-in-the-loop validation is not feasible. 40378 Failure Mode Analysis. We perform a structured analysis of the failed navigation traces collected from our evaluation and classify them into Linguis-tic (L), Topological (T), Agent (A), and Execution 

(E) failure types. Our analysis of 492 failed in-stances reveals that agent limitations constitute the dominant error dimension. Within this dimension, the agent frequently overshoots or undershoots its destination, or fails to recognize a landmark that signals the stopping point. A second recurring pattern within the same dimension concerns POI grounding, where fuzzy string matching cannot bridge the lexical gap between instruction vocabu-lary and OSM tag conventions (e.g., “light” versus 

traffic_signal ). Execution failures are the second most common type. The main issue in this category is that the agent performs the right actions, but in the wrong order. Linguistic failures are the third most com-mon. These usually happen because instructions refer to visual landmarks that are not present in OSM . Topological errors happen least often. Most come from complex junctions, such as multi-way intersections and offset streets, which are harder for the agent to navigate. 

5 Conclusions & Future work 

In this paper, we introduced GROKE , a vision-free framework for evaluating navigation instructions using OSM data. We proposed an inversion of the standard VLN task where we treat agent exe-cution success as a metric for instruction quality rather than agent capability. Our ablation stud-ies revealed that structured JSON representations combined with hierarchical sub-instruction plan-ning enable LLM s to reason effectively about spa-tial graphs. Specifically, we demonstrate that the LLM s interpret instructions better as sub-goals, al-lowing agents to focus on simple actions and en-vironmental reasoning. This approach yields per-formance metrics that correlate significantly with human judgments of navigability and eliminates the noise introduced by visual perception failures in traditional simulators. For future work, we aim to reduce computational overhead by training domain-specific small lan-guage models. We plan to use teacher-student dis-tillation to create compact models suitable for edge deployment. This optimization will facilitate the in-tegration of our system with assistive technologies and smart devices. Specifically, we intend to ex-plore how wearable sensors and smart glasses can capture environmental data to aid human naviga-tion in real-time. By processing visual or auditory inputs into topological graph data, these devices can provide accessible guidance grounded in the evaluated instructions. 

Acknowledgment 

We thank the anonymous reviewers for their con-structive feedback during the discussion period, which helped to strengthen this work. We are also grateful to Weiming Huang for the insightful dis-cussions during the early stages of this research. This work was supported by the CHIST-ERA grant CHIST-ERA-23-MultiGIS-04 (Geo-R2LLM), funded by the Research Council of Fin-land (Grant No. 368679). 

Limitations 

Our vision-free GROKE restricts the scope of evalu-ation to structural and semantic navigability. The agent operates solely on symbolic representations and therefore cannot validate instructions that rely heavily on purely visual cues not encoded in the map schema, such as “turn left at the house with the red door” or “follow the graffiti wall” . As a result, the framework is less suitable for evaluating instruction-following in environments where visual grounding is the dominant mode of guidance. At the same time, this abstraction enables controlled evaluation of safety-critical and cognitively rele-vant aspects of navigation that are often overlooked in vision-centric setups. In particular, the frame-work is well-suited for integration with assistive navigation systems, such as smart glasses or wear-able guidance devices, where symbolic reasoning, instruction clarity, and safety constraints play a cen-tral role. This allows the evaluation of navigational reliability and ambiguity in scenarios that cannot be easily captured through visual perception alone. Regarding computational efficiency, the reliance on high-reasoning LLMs introduces significant la-tency and cost. Our efficiency analysis indicates that achieving optimal trajectory fidelity requires the “High” thinking configuration, which consumes approximately 41,347 tokens per average episode. While this overhead limits the GROKE ’s suitabil-ity for large-scale deployment, the resulting exe-cution traces and decision trajectories provide a valuable resource for case-study-driven analysis and targeted model training. In particular, the col-40379 lected episodes can support the development and fine-tuning of models with improved graph compre-hension and instruction execution capabilities, en-abling future systems to approximate similar perfor-mance with substantially reduced inference costs. Finally, the empirical validity of our findings regarding spatial representations is currently lim-ited to the Gemini-3 Pro architecture. While we demonstrated that structured JSON outperforms grid-based formats for this specific model, we have not yet established whether this preference for hi-erarchical data is a universal characteristic of all LLM s or an artifact of the specific training distri-bution of the model employed. Future work must verify these findings across a broader spectrum of proprietary and open-weights models to ensure gen-eralizability. 

References 

Peter Anderson, Angel Chang, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Saurabh Gupta, Vladlen Koltun, Jana Kosecka, Jitendra Malik, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Manolis Savva, and 1 others. 2018a. On evalua-tion of embodied navigation agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.06757 .Peter Anderson, Qi Wu, Damien Teney, Jake Bruce, Mark Johnson, Niko Sünderhauf, Ian Reid, Stephen Gould, and Anton Van Den Hengel. 2018b. Vision-and-language navigation: Interpreting visually-grounded navigation instructions in real environ-ments. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 3674– 3683. Peter Anderson, Qi Wu, Damien Teney, Jake Bruce, Mark Johnson, Niko Sünderhauf, Ian Reid, Stephen Gould, and Anton van den Hengel. 2018c. Vision-and-language navigation: Interpreting visually-grounded navigation instructions in real environ-ments. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) .Max Bachmann. 2025. rapidfuzz/rapidfuzz: Release 3.13.0. Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. 2005. Meteor: An automatic metric for mt evaluation with improved cor-relation with human judgments. In Proceedings of the acl workshop on intrinsic and extrinsic evaluation measures for machine translation and/or summariza-tion , pages 65–72. Angel Chang, Angela Dai, Thomas Funkhouser, Maciej Halber, Matthias Niessner, Manolis Savva, Shuran Song, Andy Zeng, and Yinda Zhang. 2017. Matter-port3d: Learning from rgb-d data in indoor environ-ments. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.06158 .Howard Chen, Alane Suhr, Dipendra Misra, Noah Snavely, and Yoav Artzi. 2019. Touchdown: Nat-ural language navigation and spatial reasoning in visual street environments. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-tern Recognition , pages 12538–12547. Jiaqi Chen, Bingqian Lin, Ran Xu, Zhenhua Chai, Xi-aodan Liang, and Kwan-Yee Wong. 2024. Mapgpt: Map-guided prompting with adaptive path planning for vision-and-language navigation. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 9796–9810. Lichang Chen, Shiyang Li, Jun Yan, Hai Wang, Kalpa Gunaratna, Vikas Yadav, Zheng Tang, Vijay Srini-vasan, Tianyi Zhou, Heng Huang, and 1 others. 2023. Alpagasus: Training a better alpaca with fewer data. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations .Yao Cong and Hongwei Mo. 2025. An overview of robot embodied intelligence based on mul-timodal models: Tasks, models, and system schemes. International Journal of Intelligent Sys-tems , 2025(1):5124400. Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2018. BERT: pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language under-standing. CoRR , abs/1810.04805. Jiafei Duan, Samson Yu, Hui Li Tan, Hongyuan Zhu, and Cheston Tan. 2022. A survey of embodied ai: From simulators to research tasks. IEEE Transac-tions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelli-gence , 6(2):230–244. Bahare Fatemi, Jonathan Halcrow, and Bryan Perozzi. 2024. Talk like a graph: Encoding graphs for large language models. In The Twelfth International Con-ference on Learning Representations .Terrence Fong, David Kaber, Michael Lewis, Jean Scholtz, Alan Schultz, and Aaron Steinfeld. 2004. Common metrics for human-robot interactions. In 

IEEE 2004 International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, Sendai, Japan .Daniel Fried, Ronghang Hu, Volkan Cirik, Anna Rohrbach, Jacob Andreas, Louis-Philippe Morency, Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, Kate Saenko, Dan Klein, and Trevor Darrell. 2018. Speaker-follower mod-els for vision-and-language navigation. Advances in neural information processing systems , 31. Yunpeng Gao, Zhigang Wang, Linglin Jing, Dong Wang, Xuelong Li, and Bin Zhao. 2024. Aerial vision-and-language navigation via semantic-topo-metric rep-resentation guided llm reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.08500 .Jing Gu, Eliana Stefani, Qi Wu, Jesse Thomason, and Xin Wang. 2022. Vision-and-language navigation: A survey of tasks, methods, and future directions. 40380 In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 7606–7623. Gabriel Ilharco, Vihan Jain, Alexander Ku, Eugene Ie, and Jason Baldridge. 2019. General evaluation for in-struction conditioned navigation using dynamic time warping. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.05446 .James Inman. 1849. Navigation and nautical astron-omy: For the use of British seamen . F. and J. Riving-ton. Vihan Jain, Gabriel Magalhaes, Alexander Ku, Ashish Vaswani, Eugene Ie, and Jason Baldridge. 2019. Stay on the path: Instruction fidelity in vision-and-language navigation. In Proceedings of the 57th An-nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 1862–1872. Jacob Krantz, Erik Wijmans, Arjun Majumdar, Dhruv Batra, and Stefan Lee. 2020. Beyond the nav-graph: Vision-and-language navigation in continuous envi-ronments. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 104–120. Alexander Ku, Peter Anderson, Roma Patel, Eugene Ie, and Jason Baldridge. 2020. Room-across-room: Multilingual vision-and-language navigation with dense spatiotemporal grounding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.07954 .Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text summarization branches out , pages 74–81. Shubo Liu, Hongsheng Zhang, Yuankai Qi, Peng Wang, Yanning Zhang, and Qi Wu. 2023. Aerialvln: Vision-and-language navigation for uavs. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Com-puter Vision , pages 15384–15394. Feipeng Ma, Yizhou Zhou, Yueyi Zhang, Siying Wu, Zheyu Zhang, Zilong He, Fengyun Rao, and Xiaoyan Sun. 2024. Task navigator: Decomposing complex tasks for multimodal large language models. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops ,pages 2248–2257. Harsh Mehta, Yoav Artzi, Jason Baldridge, Eugene Ie, and Piotr Mirowski. 2020. Retouchdown: Adding touchdown to streetlearn as a shareable resource for language grounding tasks in street view. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.03671 .Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic evalu-ation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics , pages 311–318. Raphael Schumann and Stefan Riezler. 2021. Generat-ing landmark navigation instructions from maps as a graph-to-text problem. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Raphael Schumann and Stefan Riezler. 2022. Analyzing generalization of vision and language navigation to unseen outdoor areas. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 7519– 7532. Raphael Schumann, Wanrong Zhu, Weixi Feng, Tsu-Jui Fu, Stefan Riezler, and William Yang Wang. 2024. Velma: Verbalization embodiment of llm agents for vision and language navigation in street view. In 

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 38, pages 18924–18933. Stefanie Tellex, Nakul Gopalan, Hadas Kress-Gazit, and Cynthia Matuszek. 2020. Robots that use language. 

Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems , 3(1):25–55. Erik F. Tjong Kim Sang and Fien De Meulder. 2003. Introduction to the CoNLL-2003 shared task: Language-independent named entity recognition. In 

Proceedings of the Seventh Conference on Natural Language Learning at HLT-NAACL 2003 , pages 142– 147. Ramakrishna Vedantam, C Lawrence Zitnick, and Devi Parikh. 2015. Cider: Consensus-based image de-scription evaluation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-tion , pages 4566–4575. Khoa Vo, Taisei Hanyu, Yuki Ikebe, Trong Thang Pham, Nhat Chung, Minh Nhat Vu, Duy Nguyen Ho Minh, Anh Nguyen, Anthony Gunderman, Chase Rainwater, and 1 others. 2025. Clutter-resistant vision-language-action models through object-centric and geometry grounding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.22519 .Xin Wang, Qiuyuan Huang, Asli Celikyilmaz, Jianfeng Gao, Dinghan Shen, Yuan-Fang Wang, William Yang Wang, and Lei Zhang. 2019. Reinforced cross-modal matching and self-supervised imitation learning for vision-language navigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pat-tern recognition , pages 6629–6638. Hui Wei, Zihao Zhang, Shenghua He, Tian Xia, Shijia Pan, and Fei Liu. 2025. PlanGenLLMs: A modern survey of LLM planning capabilities. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 19497–19521, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Fujing Xie and Sören Schwertfeger. 2024. Empowering robot path planning with large language models: os-mag map topology & hierarchy comprehension with llms. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics (ROBIO) , pages 707–712. IEEE. Urchade Zaratiana, Nadi Tomeh, Pierre Holat, and Thierry Charnois. 2024. GLiNER: Generalist model for named entity recognition using bidirectional trans-former. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of 40381 the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 5364–5376, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jianan Zhao, Le Zhuo, Yikang Shen, Meng Qu, Kai Liu, Michael M. Bronstein, Zhaocheng Zhu, and Jian Tang. 2024. Graphtext: Graph reasoning in text space. In Adaptive Foundation Models: Evolving AI for Personalized and Efficient Learning .Ming Zhao, Peter Anderson, Vihan Jain, Su Wang, Alexander Ku, Jason Baldridge, and Eugene Ie. 2021. On the evaluation of vision-and-language navigation instructions. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics: Main Volume , pages 1302– 1316. Gengze Zhou, Yicong Hong, and Qi Wu. 2024. Navgpt: Explicit reasoning in vision-and-language naviga-tion with large language models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,volume 38, pages 7641–7649. 

Appendices         

> Table of Contents AAblation Studies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 A.1 Different Types of Spatial Information. . . . . . . . . . 13 A.2 Sub-instructions & Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 A.3 POI detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 A.4 Thinking Leve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
> BPrompt Templates. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

A Ablation Studies 

We conducted ablation studies to assess the core components of the proposed method. We randomly sampled 100 instances from the seen validation dataset of Map2Seq and performed all the abla-tion experiments. We analyzed different types of spatial information presentation in Section A.1, which corresponds to the navigator agent. Then, in Section A.2, we assessed the effectiveness of the Sub-instruction divider agent. In Section A.3, we evaluated the accuracy of POI detection using different models compared to human-level perfor-mance. Finally, in Section A.4, we examined how the thinking procedure in these models affects the final results to determine if LLM reasoning aids the process and justifies the computational cost. Additionally, we studied the relationship between instructions and how sub-instruction updates facili-tate the navigation process. 

Data annotation. To ensure better data inter-pretability, we employ human annotators to process the navigation instructions. Specifically, we vali-date instruction difficulty and navigability, while also annotating POI s mentions within the text. Inter-annotator agreement was measured using Co-hen’s κ on the binary navigability judgments, yield-ing κ = 0 .67 (“Substantial” agreement). Human annotators viewed a static map rendering of the OSM graph alongside the navigation instruction text, replicating the same viewing conditions used in the Map2Seq annotation protocol. No Street View imagery or photographic representations were provided, ensuring that annotator judgments are based exclusively on the spatial graph and textual modality available to the GROKE agent. For diffi-culty assessment, we independently evaluated and rated each navigation instruction on a scale of 1 to 10 across three distinct dimensions which we have defined as Linguistic Intricacy, Topological Complexity, and Operational Demand. We calculated the average rating for each instruc-tion and normalized the scores to classify them into three subcategories. Terminology and descriptions for these measurements are defined below: • Linguistic Intricacy: This metric assesses the semantic load required to interpret the instruction. We evaluate the visibility of at-tributes alongside the density of the text in-cluding the frequency of action verbs and the specificity of landmark references. • Topological Complexity: This metric per-tains to the graph network and the physical layout of the environment. We consider fac-tors such as the total Euclidean distance, the spatial coverage of the area, and the geometry of the path within the map structure. • Operational Demand: This metric concen-trates on the physical effort required to tra-verse the path. We measure this by analyzing the quantity of discrete steps, the number of re-quired turns, and the frequency of transitions between different areas or floors. As result, we categorized each case into one of three levels: (1) Easy where cases consist of short paths accompanied by simple instructions that re-quire minimal spatial reasoning and utilize clear landmarks; (2) Medium where cases involve in-structions of moderate length that contain multiple spatial phrases and dictate traversal over medium-length paths; and (3) Hard in which the cases in-40382 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0  

> 0.0
> 2.5
> 5.0
> 7.5
> 10.0
> 12.5
> 15.0
> 17.5
> Count
> =0.40 =0.19
> Easy (n=49)
> Medium (n=38)
> Hard (n=13)
> Density

Figure 3: Normalized complexity score distribution. 

volve long trajectories guided by complex multi-step instructions which often necessitate floor tran-sitions and the processing of multiple spatial ref-erences. Figure 3 illustrates the normalized com-plexity score distribution following the annotation process. The dataset is categorized into 49 easy, 38 medium, and 13 hard instructions. Statistically, the distribution yields a mean of μ = 0 .40 and a standard deviation of σ = 0 .19 .For the navigability assessment, we defined cor-rectness as the human evaluator arriving within a 25-meter radius of the designated end location in binary scale (0-1). Finally, we manually tag and count POI s men-tioned in the navigation instructions. When the same POI type appears multiple times within a sin-gle instruction, we count it as one instance. For example, if an instruction contains several refer-ences to traffic lights (such as “turn at the traffic light” and “pass the traffic light” ), we record this as a single POI. 

A.1 Different Types of Spatial Information. 

To demonstrate how distinct spatial representations influence LLM performance, we compared var-ious prompting formats for encoding spatial in-formation. We evaluated four core representation strategies for graph and spatial data: (1) Textual or incident encoding; (2) Structured JSON for-mat; (3) Graphviz-style visual representation; and (4) Matrix or grid representation. These design choices take inspiration from the works by Gao et al. (2024); Fatemi et al. (2024) and Zhao et al. (2024). In textual encoding, we characterize the graph structure by enumerating each node’s direct con-nections. This approach represents both nodes and their connectivity through natural language text attributes. For each node, we describe its connec-tions to adjacent nodes with heading information in degrees. 

Textual Format Example   

> Node 38eb: Connected to nodes: - Node 4242 is to the forward (heading: 208.6 ◦,Southwest) Intersection 4242: Connected to nodes: - Node cbc2 is to the forward (heading: 208.9 ◦,Southwest) - Node 5b89 is to the left (heading: 119.0 ◦,Southeast) Branches from this intersection: - Forward branch (heading: 208.9 ◦, Southwest): - Path: cbcf →c5d0 ....

The textual format includes POI legends, current position markers, compass directions, and intersec-tion branch exploration where applicable. Each node description contains its type (intersection or waypoint), connections with headings h ∈ [0 , 360) ,and nearby POI s with directional and distance in-formation. For the Structured JSON format, we maintain the spatial data hierarchically in a machine-readable structure. The JSON representation organizes nodes and POI s into separate sections. Each node entry contains its identifier, type classification, heading value h, connection list with target node IDs and headings, and optional coordinate data 

(lat , lng ) when available. Intersection nodes in-clude branch information with extended node se-quences per direction (Left, Right, Forward). The POI section lists all landmarks with their assigned letters, nearby node references, directional infor-mation, and distance measurements in meters. This hierarchical organization facilitates structured pars-ing and programmatic access to spatial relation-ships. Regarding visual language representations, the first approach uses Graphviz-style notation that ex-plicitly delineates nodes and edges using arrow syntax. For example, 13480 → 78640 [heading: 

30 ◦, direction: Forward] . By separating node definition from edge definition with clear arrow notation, it provides a significantly cleaner struc-ture for the LLM to parse. The Graphviz format supports both arrow-style notation and full DOT format syntax. It includes intersection markers, branch chains with multiple nodes per direction, and POI connections marked with dashed edges and distance annotations. 40383 Graphvis Style Format Example                         

> 5fa6 →946a [heading: 208 ◦, direction: Forward] 946a →ec11 [heading: 208 ◦, direction: Forward] ec11 →4242 [heading: 208 ◦, direction: Forward] 4242[Intersection] →5c7f [heading: 208 ◦, direction: Forward] 4242[Intersection] →501f [heading: 208 ◦, direction: Forward] 4242[Intersection] →db40 [heading: 208 ◦, direction: Forward]
> Intersection Branches (extended nodes)
> 4242 Forward
> −−−−→5c7f →d4cc [heading: 208 ◦, Southwest] 4242 Left
> −−→501f →bf02 [heading: 119 ◦, Southeast] 4242 Right
> −−−→db40 →84bc [heading: 298 ◦, Northwest]

The second visual approach positions OSM nodes within two-dimensional grids to render the map in a pixel-wise text format. This represen-tation converts the spatial graph into a matrix 

G ∈ RH×W where each cell G[i, j ] contains a character representing the spatial state. We employ Breadth-First Search ( BFS ) traversal starting from a start node to establish relative coordinates for the grid construction. The position of each node relies on heading-based directional offsets where we map headings h to directional vectors (dr, dc ). Head-ings where 315 ◦ ≤ h < 360 ◦ or 0◦ ≤ h < 45 ◦

map to North (−1, 0) , 45 ◦ ≤ h < 135 ◦ map to East (0 , 1) , 135 ◦ ≤ h < 225 ◦ map to South (1 , 0) ,and 225 ◦ ≤ h < 315 ◦ map to West (0 , −1) .We design a logic for POI integration to maintain spatial accuracy without cluttering the path. We first assess if a POI resides within a defined thresh-old distance, typically 20 meters, of an intersection node. If the POI is near an intersection, we calcu-late the heading from the intersection to the POI to determine the correct diagonal quadrant. We place these corner POI s at diagonal offsets, such as (−1, 1) for Northeast or (1 , 1) for Southeast, which ensures they occupy cells that do not inter-sect with the cardinal route segments. For POI slocated along standard path segments, we calculate the heading from the nearest path node and posi-tion the POI in the adjacent cell corresponding to that direction. If a POI is extremely close to the node, typically under 5 meters, it may share the grid position unless that position is reserved for start or current markers. The grid utilizes a specific character set to de-note state configuration and facilitate LLM inter-pretation. ‘S’ indicates the initial starting position and ‘P’ marks the current agent location. We use ‘1’ to represent previously visited nodes and ‘2’ to denote the current forward path segments. In-

Figure 4: Matrix / grid representation for the second iteration of the instruction: “Make two left turns to head the opposite way on the other side of the block.” The first left turn is already executed, as indicated by the past trajectory denoted as ‘1’ in the representation. 

tersections are explicitly marked with ‘3’, while ‘0’ denotes empty space. We represent specific landmarks using single characters defined in a dy-namically created “poi_mapping” dictionary, and thereby creating a dynamic legend where a land-mark name maps to a specific letter. This mapping is either provided explicitly or extracted dynami-cally from the path data to ensure that every visible POI has a unique identifier within the grid context. Figure 4 shows an example of the grid presentation for specific navigation instruction. For all evaluation modes, we constrained the input data to mitigate hallucinations within the LLM . We acknowledge that excessive context size increases computational overhead and the probabil-ity of information retrieval errors. As our objective is to develop a navigation agent, we exclusively provide the immediate surroundings, effectively simulating the limited field of view visible to a hu-man observer. This constraint limits the number of nodes and POI s included in each representation while preserving the essential spatial connectiv-ity information required for navigation decision-making. 

Results. Figure 5 and Table 6 summarize the quantitative results for different types of spatial information representation. As illustrated in Figure 5, the Structured JSON and Textual encodings significantly outperform the visual language approaches. The JSON format achieves the most favorable balance across metrics, recording a Navigation Error of 68.4 meters and a Success Rate of 63.0%. The Textual representation follows closely with an NE of 70.8 meters and an 40384 Table 6: Performance comparison on Navigation Execution for different types of spatial information representation categorized by the instruction difficulty. The bottom row reports optimized representation’s improvement over the best existing method.                                                                                         

> Thinking Level Navigation Execution Easy Medium Hard NE ↓SR ↑OSR ↑nDTW ↑NE ↓SR ↑OSR ↑nDTW ↑NE ↓SR ↑OSR ↑nDTW ↑
> Textual 71.3 61.2% 69.4% 0.602 56.6 68.4% 71.1% 0.637 110.6 38.5% 46.2% 0.380
> JSON 62.1 61.2% 75.5% 0.603 61.2 68.4% 78.9% 0.637 112.9 53.8% 53.8% 0.525
> Graphvis-style 90.4 40.8% 53.1% 0.401 87.8 47.4% 52.6% 0.453 146.5 15.4% 30.8% 0.151 Grid 186.7 6.1% 8.2% 0.060 160.3 13.2% 13.2% 0.128 176.6 15.4% 23.1% 0.141
> Optimized Repr. 35.6 77.6% 85.7% 0.762 30.9 76.3% 84.2% 0.715 93.3 53.8% 61.5% 0.527 Improve. 42.7% 26.8% 13.5% 26.4% 45.4% 11.5% 6.7% 12.2% 15.6% 0.0% 14.3% 0.4%

Note: Dark purple and light purple indicate the top-performing and second top-performer per column. Opti. Repr. json textual graph_vis grid                 

> (a) NE (m)
> 0
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> 125
> 150
> 175
> 41.3
> 68.4 70.8
> 96.7
> 175.4
> Opti. Repr. json textual graph_vis grid
> (b) SR (%)
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 74.0
> 63.0 61.0
> 40.0
> 10.0
> Opti. Repr. json textual graph_vis grid
> (c) OSR (%)
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 82.0
> 74.0
> 67.0
> 50.0
> 12.0
> Opti. Repr. json textual graph_vis grid
> (d) nDTW
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8 0.769
> 0.643 0.633
> 0.483
> 0.169

Figure 5: Overall performance comparison on Navigation Execution for different types of spatial information representation. 

SR of 61.0%. While their navigation success rates are comparable, the JSON format demonstrates superior path fidelity. It achieves a higher nDTW score of 0.643 compared to 0.633 for the Textual format and a notably higher Oracle Success Rate of 74.0% versus 67.0%. This indicates that the hierarchical structure of JSON may allow the agent to recover from deviations more effectively than the linear narrative of the Textual format. The visual encoding strategies lag behind the se-mantic formats. The Graphviz-style representation results in a significantly higher NE of 96.7 meters and a reduced SR of 40.0%. The Grid represen-tation proves to be the least effective method for this task. It yields the highest global Navigation Error of 175.4 meters and a minimal Success Rate of 10.0%. The extremely low nDTW of 0.169 for the Grid format suggests that the LLM struggles to parse high-density ASCII matrices or derive spatial relationships from pixel-wise text layouts. The pre-dominant error in this mode involves the selection of ‘0’ cells representing unexplored areas, even though the instructions explicitly prohibited such actions. Table 6 reveals how performance diverges as in-struction complexity increases. In the Easy and 

Medium categories, the distinction between Tex-tual and JSON formats is minimal. For Medium difficulty tasks, both formats achieve an identical Success Rate of 68.4%. The Textual format even records a slightly better Navigation Error in this specific tier (56.6m vs 61.2m). However, in the Hard category, the performance of the Textual representation degrades sharply, with the Success Rate dropping to 38.5%. In contrast, the JSON format maintains a significantly higher SR of 53.8% and a higher nDTW score of 0.525 compared to 0.380 for Textual. This divergence suggests that while natural language descriptions are sufficient for simple routing, the cognitive load associated with parsing complex, multi-step textual instructions hampers reasoning. 

Optimized Representation. Since the Struc-tured JSON format appears to be the most promis-ing, we analyzed all the failure cases. As shown in Table 7, the errors in JSON presentations relate primarily to Spatial Grounding, specifically the model’s failure to detect POI s and map semantic 40385 Table 7: Error analysis of wrongly predicated path for navigation instructions in JSON presentation.              

> Error Category Description Frequency (Count)
> Spatial Grounding Failure to detect POIs or map semantic labels to inputs. 17 Spatial Enumeration Errors in counting discrete landmarks (e.g., “3rd light" ). 6State Estimation Failures in heading initialization or instruction pointer updates (re-runs). 5Ambiguity / Dataset Error Vague instructions or incorrect ground truth labels. 5Topological Mismatch Agent fails at node due to descriptions and environmental layout mismatch. 4

relationships, and Spatial Enumeration Errors in-volving the counting of discrete landmarks. These two types of error contribute to 62% of all errors in this category. In addition, there are cases where the Agent traverses the correct path but fails to stop at the specific node. To address mentioned issues in JSON presenta-tions, we added more criteria to the prompt and included clarifications for handling POI s. Addi-tionally, we appended the iteration number to the 

IN_PROGRESS sub-instruction to assist the LLM sin tracking counts, such as when passing the “3rd light.” We also observed that providing details like lat and lng complicated the decision process rather than improved the navigation ability, so we removed these coordinates from the JSON prompts. The final prompt for the navigator agent is provided in Prompt 2. The last row of Table 6 and the hatched bar in Figure 5 display the results of the modified JSON representation regarding this error analysis, showing substantial relative improvements of up to 45.4% in navigation error reduction and 26.8% in success rate gains compared to the best baseline methods. Consequently, we exclusively utilize this optimized representation for all future experiments. 

A Case Study. Figure 6 illustrates one of the most frequent failure cases caused by incorrect planning or execution. In this scenario, the naviga-tion instruction is as follows: “Go straight through 1 light and at the following light very soon after the 1st, a garden or square should be on the near right corner. Turn right and walk to the next light. Turn left and pass a 4-way intersection and stop just before entering the traffic light. A bus stop should be on the far left corner.” As demonstrated in the figure, the objective is to stop immediately before the intersection. However, the agent extends the path further because it misinterprets the intention of the guide as providing an address to reach the bus stop itself. Generally, we can conclude that this specific typex of failure originates from the misun-

Figure 6: Visualization of a navigation failure where the agent overshoots the intended goal. The map displays the ground truth path and the agent’s route, highlighting how the agent incorrectly interprets the bus stop land-mark as the destination rather than a reference point for the stopping location. 

derstanding of ambiguous instructions regarding the final stopping condition. 

A.2 Sub-instructions & Planning 

Here, we investigated two distinct aspects concern-ing sub-instruction, where we first evaluated the importance of the existence of a divider agent and subsequently analyzed how planning and state man-agement facilitate the LLM s in the execution of instructions. 

Sub-instruction Divider Agent. To test the im-pact of dividing the instruction into sub-instructions using LLM s for better interpretability, we con-ducted three different tests. In the first method, we prompted the LLM s with the complete instruc-tion, whereas in the second method, we employed a simple rule-based approach where the text was split using periods. Finally, we provided the sub-instructions produced by the same LLM as steps to the LLM . Although we agree that LLM s are capa-ble of performing tasks, achieving reasonable re-sults requires defining the task in a simple and clear manner. As the results demonstrate, the model can interpret the instruction better when instructions 40386 are defined as sub-goals. Furthermore, the model can focus more effectively and reason better about the surrounding environment when instructions are divided into simple actions, such as moving for-ward or turning, combined with specific criteria like “after X” or “when seeing Y.” 

Table 8 summarizes the results across these three methodologies. Based on the results obtained, the data indicates that breaking down complex direc-tives significantly reduces ambiguity and improves the execution success rate. Notably, the LLM Divider method consistently surpasses the rule-based splitting, suggesting that intelligent, context-aware segmentation is better than rigid syntactic splitting based on punctuation. This advantage is particularly pronounced in the “Hard” difficulty settings, where the divider agent maintains a higher performance with a 53.8% suc-cess rate, whereas the baselines degrade signifi-cantly. Ultimately, transforming instructions into explicit sub-goals allows the agent to reason more effectively about immediate actions without losing track of the global objective. 

Planning State. In addition, we manually in-spected the impact of planning regarding the state update of sub-instructions and their dependency. The first insight reveals that although LLM s can perform complex tasks, the model encounters dif-ficulties when a sub-instruction requires repeating a movement multiple times, such as “Continue straight through the next three intersections.” In these scenarios, even though we provided the pre-vious steps the agent had already passed, we must specifically define the current iteration count for the sub-instruction in progress to avoid errors re-lated to repeated movements. Furthermore, certain instructions require waiting until a specific con-dition is satisfied, such as moving to the end of next block to ensure the visibility of POI s men-tioned in the text. Consequently, it is impossible to track the path effectively if we do not maintain states for each sub-instruction. The final case we identified involves human-generated navigation in-structions where actions in different instructions are relevant to each other, such as “move forward until X. Turn left before Y on the corner” These examples demonstrate how distinct previous steps are interrelated. To conclude, consistent with recent literature highlighting that providing a structured plan or de-composing tasks allows LLM s to better compre-hend the environment and task structure (Ma et al., 2024; Wei et al., 2025), our findings confirm that LLM reasoning is significantly enhanced when un-derpinned by effective planning mechanisms. 

A.3 POI detection 

As detailed in the Annotation section, we anno-tated the navigation instructions and obtained a total of 382 entities tagged as POI s. To assess the capability of different Named Entity Recog-nition ( NER ) models in this specific domain, we conducted a comparative analysis using three dis-tinct approaches. We evaluated GLiNER (Zara-tiana et al., 2024), a generalist model designed for zero-shot named entity recognition, and a BERT-large (Tjong Kim Sang and De Meulder, 2003; Devlin et al., 2018) model fine-tuned for standard NER tasks. Additionally, we tested the zero-shot annotation capabilities of Gemini-3 Pro. Regarding the dataset characteristics, the aver-age length of the selected navigation instructions is 49.46 words. The density of entities varies per in-struction, with a minimum of one and a maximum of eight POI s per instruction. The most frequent POI s are Light, Starbucks, Duane Reade, Chase Bank, Subway, and Garden. Table 9 summarizes the quantitative results of this evaluation. Remarkably, Gemini failed to detect only 4 en-tities out of the total 382, which corresponds to an error rate of just 1.05%. This performance is highly promising for this task because it indi-cates the model can operate at the level of a human expert. For the GLiNER setup, we utilized the “urchade/gliner_large-v2.1” 4 checkpoint with the following set of target labels: “amenity”, “cuisine”, “leisure”, “tourism”, “shop”, “highway”, and “trans-portation”. Although the model is computationally efficient and the inference is very fast, its zero-shot performance remains significantly lower than the results achieved by Gemini. However, the annota-tion outputs suggest that GLiNER could potentially reach a near-perfect level with a small amount of fine-tuning. In contrast, the results from the BERT model (“dslim/bert-large-NER” 5) were unsatisfactory. The model could detect standard store names but failed to identify a large portion of the domain-specific entities. Based on the error analysis, BERT misses approximately 2 POI s per instruc-

> 4https://huggingface.co/urchade/gliner_ large-v2.1
> 5https://huggingface.co/dslim/bert-large-NER

40387 Table 8: Performance comparison on Navigation Execution for different sub-instruction methods categorized by the instruction difficulty. The bottom row reports the LLM Divider’s improvement over the best baseline method.                                                                 

> Method Navigation Execution Easy Medium Hard NE ↓SR ↑OSR ↑nDTW ↑NE ↓SR ↑OSR ↑nDTW ↑NE ↓SR ↑OSR ↑nDTW ↑
> Complete Instr. 49.6 59.2% 65.3% 0.581 71.3 50.0% 52.6% 0.477 157.9 23.1% 23.1% 0.229 Rule-based Split 58.9 49.0% 69.4% 0.478 40.7 65.8% 78.9% 0.592 108.2 38.5% 38.5% 0.382 LLM Divider 35.6 77.6% 85.7% 0.762 30.9 76.3% 84.2% 0.715 93.3 53.8% 61.5% 0.527 Improve. 28.2% 31.1% 23.5% 31.2% 24.1% 16.0% 6.7% 20.8% 13.8% 39.7% 59.7% 38.0%

Note: Dark purple and light purple indicate the top-performing and second top-performer per column. 

Table 9: Entity recognition performance across models evaluated on 100 instructions with an average of 3.82 annotated entities per instruction (382 total). 

Model Num. Errors ↓ Correctness Rate ↑

BERT 191 50.00 % GLiNER 137 64.13 % Gemini-3 Pro 4 98.95 % NE 

> (per 1m reduction)
> SR
> (per 1% increase)
> OSR
> (per 1% increase)
> nDTW
> (per 0.01 increase)
> 0
> 250
> 500
> 750
> 1000
> 1250
> 1500
> 1750
> Tokens per Unit Gain
> 1,334
> 1.60¢
> 1,356
> 1.63¢
> 1,356
> 1.63¢
> 1,731
> 2.08¢

Figure 7: Marginal cost of performance improvements across navigation metrics. The additional computational cost required to achieve a single unit of improvement for different metrics. Costs are measured in thought tokens and estimated price in cents (center label, based on $12 per 1M tokens) incurred over the baseline method. 

tion. Given that the average density of entities is 3.82 per instruction, this error rate is too high to be considered reliable for this application. 

A.4 Thinking Level 

In the context of LLM s, when we talk about “think-ing”, we usually refer to simulated reasoning rather than consciousness or human-like cognition. It is a specific technical process where the model gener-ates intermediate steps to solve a problem, rather than jumping directly to an answer. In a standard LLM, the model tries to predict the final answer immediately. This technique is called Chain of Thought ( CoT ). So, we force the model to generate text that breaks down the problem, and the model effectively gives itself space to store intermediate variables and logic. This prevents the model from having to do all the computation in a single forward pass. It is also worth noting the technical debate concerning whether this process constitutes “real” thinking. From a skeptic’s perspective, the out-put is merely a statistically likely token prediction where the model possesses neither intent nor aware-ness. In contrast, from the functionalist view, if the model engages with a complex novel problem by breaking it down, identifying errors, and correcting them to produce an accurate solution, the process is functionally indistinguishable from reasoning regardless of the underlying biological substrate. As documented in the Gemini API reference 6,the Gemini-3 series models utilize an internal "thinking process" that significantly improves their reasoning and multi-step planning abilities. This capability makes them highly effective for perform-ing complex tasks. Consequently, we investigated how the thinking process influences the perfor-mance of our navigator agent. For this purpose, we evaluated the Gemini-3 Pro model on this task using three different configurations of the thinking level: low, high, and the default automatic setting without a defined limit. Table 10 details the Navigation Execution perfor-mance across varying instruction difficulties. We observe a non-linear relationship between the think-ing level and task complexity. For Easy instruc-tions, the High thinking configuration achieves the lowest Navigation Error (NE) of 28.2m and the highest Success Rate (SR) of 81.6%. Similarly, in the Hard category, the High setting proves essen-tial, attaining a dominant SR of 61.5% compared 

> 6

https://ai.google.dev/gemini-api/docs/ thinking 40388 Table 10: Performance comparison on Navigation Execution for different Thinking Level configurations categorized by instruction difficulty.                                                         

> Thinking Level Navigation Execution Easy Medium Hard NE ↓SR ↑OSR ↑nDTW ↑NE ↓SR ↑OSR ↑nDTW ↑NE ↓SR ↑OSR ↑nDTW ↑
> Low 46.6 73.5% 81.6% 0.721 42.1 68.4% 81.6% 0.638 86.1 53.8% 61.5% 0.525 High 28.2 81.6% 89.8% 0.801 52.5 71.1% 81.6% 0.633 78.1 61.5% 76.9% 0.602
> Auto 35.6 77.6% 85.7% 0.762 30.9 76.3% 84.2% 0.715 93.3 53.8% 61.5% 0.527
> Note: Dark purple and light purple indicate the top-performing and second top-performer per column.

Table 11: Overall performance and efficiency comparison across different thinking levels.                                         

> Method Navigation Performance Efficiency Statistics NE ↓SR ↑OSR ↑nDTW ↑Avg Steps Avg Total Tokens ↓Avg Thoughts Tokens ↓Avg Prompt Tokens ↓
> Low 50.0 69.0% 79.0% 0.664 5.51 33,236 13,010 19,956
> High 43.9 75.0% 85.0% 0.711 5.50 41,347 21,146 19,933
> Auto 41.3 74.0% 82.0% 0.714 5.76 43,700 22,335 21,098
> Note: Dark purple and light purple indicate the top-performing (or most efficient) and second-best method per column.

to both Low and Auto configurations. This suggests that complex spatial reasoning tasks necessitate the extended intermediate computation provided by higher thinking budgets. The aggregate performance, presented in Table 11, highlights the distinct trade-off between effi-cacy and computational expenditure. While the 

High and Auto methods dominate the effectiveness metrics – with High achieving the peak overall Suc-cess Rate of 75.0% – the Low setting functions as a highly resource-efficient baseline. It consumes ap-proximately 33,236 total tokens on average, which is significantly lower than the 41,347 tokens uti-lized by High and 43,700 by Auto . The majority of this discrepancy arises from the “Thoughts Tokens” volume, which nearly doubles between the Low and 

Auto settings. Consequently, while increasing the thinking budget correlates with improved naviga-tion outcomes, it incurs a substantial overhead in token consumption. We analyzed the marginal cost of improvement as illustrated in Figure 7. This analysis reveals the additional computational investment required to achieve a single unit of gain across different metrics. We find that reducing the Navigation Er-ror (NE) by 1 meter costs approximately 1,334 tokens (estimated at 1.60¢), whereas increasing the Success Rate (SR) by 1% demands 1,356 tokens (1.63¢). The cost curve is steepest for trajectory fi-delity; achieving a 0.01 increase in nDTW requires 1,731 tokens (2.08¢), significantly more than other metrics. These findings suggest that the internal "thinking process" of the Gemini-3 model adheres to a law of diminishing returns. While the High thinking level is indispensable for maximizing success in complex scenarios (Hard instructions), the cost per unit of improvement is non-trivial. For applications where strict trajectory adherence (high nDTW) is less critical than simple goal arrival, the Low con-figuration may offer a more favorable cost-benefit ratio. 

B Prompt Templates 

We provide detailed prompt templates for each sub-task within GROKE . These templates are designed to clearly define the objectives and input-output requirements for the models to ensure consistency and reproducibility across evaluations. Each tem-plate includes specific instructions and rigorous data schemas tailored to the corresponding sub-task, as illustrated in Prompts 1 and 2. For the Sub-instruction & POI Extraction task, the input is natu-ral language text, which must be parsed into a struc-tured JSON object containing sequential sub_goals, status flags (e.g., ToDo), and categorized land-marks ( OSM POI s). On the other side, the Topo-logical Graph Navigation task requires a naviga-tion_context input – comprising current_position, nodes, intersections, and connections – from which the model must deduce a specific Target_Node_ID string and update the SubPlan_Status. 40389 Prompt 1: Sub-instruction & POI Extraction 

[System Role] You are a Navigation Instruction Parser. Your goal is to translate natural language navi-gation instructions into structured, machine-readable sub-goals compatible with OSM data. 

[Definitions] 

1. LANDMARKS (OSM POIs): Identify physical entities visible on a map. 

- Traffic Control: Traffic lights, stop signs. 

- Amenities: Banks, shops, restaurants, pharmacy, gas stations, bicycle rental, cinema. 

- Natural: Parks, etc. 2. ACTIONS: Use only these verbs. 

- MOVE_FORWARD (continue straight) 

- TURN_LEFT - TURN_RIGHT 

3. RELATIONS: Define the spatial relationship between the Action and the Landmark (e.g., "turn left AT the lights" , "walk PAST the bank" ). 

[Task] Decompose the Full Instruction into a JSON object containing: 1. A list of all unique “landmarks” mentioned. 2. A sequential list of “sub_goals”. 3. For each sub-goal, assign a “status” (TODO, IN_PROGRESS, COMPLETED). Note: Unless live telemetry is provided, default all future steps to TODO. [OUTPUT FORMAT - STRICT JSON] 

Navigation Instruction: Turn right at the light im-mediately in front . . . 

Prompt 2: Topological Graph Navigation Agent 

[Task Description] You are an embodied agent nav-igating using a topological graph-based map. Your goal is to determine the final target node for the cur-rent Sub-Goal based on the provided JSON naviga-tion context. 

[Input Format] 

Instruction: Go straight to the light and turn left. Proceed to the next . . . , Trestle on Tenth should be on that near . . . 

Current Sub-Goal: Proceed to the next light and turn right. 

Sub-Goal State: IN PROGRESS Landmarks : light 

Navigation Context (JSON):  

> 1

{ 

> 2

" navigation_context ": { 

> 3

" current_position ": { 

> 4

" node_id ": " cb04 ", "heading ": 209 , "compass_direction ": "Southwest "  

> 5

},  

> 6

" previous_path ": [{  

> 7

" node_id ": "8 b2f ",  

> 8

" to_next ": { 

> 9

" direction ": " Forward ", " heading ": 298.5  

> 10

} 

> 11

},  

> 12

"..."  

> 13

],  

> 14

" current_path_nodes ": [{  

> 15

" node_id ": "0 cc7a ",  

> 16

" to_next ": { 

> 17

" direction ": " Forward ", " heading ": 124.5  

> 18

} 

> 19

},  

> 20

"..."  

> 21

] 

> 22

} 

> 23

}

Includes ‘current_position‘, ‘nodes‘, ‘connections‘, ‘intersections‘, and ‘pois‘. [OUTPUT FORMAT - STRICT JSON] 

1. SubPlan_Status :

- “COMPLETED” : If the Target_Node_ID you identified successfully finishes the specific action described in Current Sub-Goal. (Ignore future steps in the main Instruction). 

- “IN_PROGRESS” : If the Target_Node_ID is just an intermediate waypoint and you have not yet reached the location/intersection required by the Current Sub-Goal. 

2. Next_Place : Target_Node_ID (String). The final Node ID AFTER executing the entire sub-goal instruction. 

Planning State :1. Go straight to the light and turn left. ( COMPLETED )2. Proceed to the next light and turn right. (IN_PROGRESS , Iteration 1) 3. Go all the way to the end of the block at the next light and stop in the middle of that intersection. (TODO )

[Constraints] 

- Use the provided JSON graph topology. Do not hallucinate coordinates or nodes not present in the “nodes” list. - Valid Movement: You can only move between nodes if they are explicitly linked in the “connections” list of the current node. - Node Types: 

- “waypoint” : A standard road segment. Usually has a “Forward” connection. 

- “intersection” : A decision point. Con-tains “branches” (Forward, Left, Right). - Evaluate SubPlan_Status strictly against the Current Sub-Goal. - The output must be the final location for the current Sub-Goal. - POIs: Points of Interest are linked to specific nodes (‘nearby_node_id‘). Use the ’pois’ list to locate landmarks. 

- “On the Corner Validation” : If an instruction specifies a turn at a landmark "on the corner," you must verify that the landmark’s nearby_node_id is immediate to the intersection node (distance 3 15m or adjacent connection). 40390 - “Turn Prevention” : If the Landmark is visible in the pois list but its nearby_node_id requires moving Forward through the current intersection to reach it, DO NOT TURN. You must proceed IN_PROGRESS towards the landmark. 

[Clarifications] 

- Processing Instructions: If the instruction is “Go straight”, traverse through connected “waypoint” nodes until you reach an “intersection” or the max depth of the current graph, and if the instruction is 

“Turn [direction] at [landmark/intersection]” :- Identify the node associated with the landmark (from ‘pois‘) or the next ‘intersection‘ node. - From that intersection node, select the connection matching the direction (Left/Right). - Intersection Logic: When the instruction implies turning at an intersection, your target is the first node immediately after the turn. Look at the ‘intersection‘ node’s ‘connections‘ or ‘branches‘. Find the ‘target_node_id‘ corresponding to the requested ‘direction‘ (e.g., ’Right’). This ‘target_node_id‘ is your destination. - Landmark Logic: 

- “Stopping Criteria” : When a landmark is the destination, determine the target node based on the spatial preposition used (e.g., "past," "before," "at"). Select the first node that satisfies this relationship relative to the landmark’s position. 

- “Conditional Visibility” : If an instruc-tion requires a turn "regarding [landmark]" continue traversing nodes (implicitly "Go straight") until the landmark is confirmed visible. Do not execute the turn logic until this condition is met. 40391